Machine learning approaches offer the potential to systematically identify transcriptional regulatory interactions from a compendium of microarray expression profiles. However, experimental validation of the performance of these methods at the genome scale has remained elusive. Here we assess the global performance of four existing classes of inference algorithms using 445 Escherichia coli Affymetrix arrays and 3,216 known E. coli regulatory interactions from RegulonDB. We also developed and applied the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm, a novel extension of the relevance networks class of algorithms. CLR demonstrates an average precision gain of 36% relative to the next-best performing algorithm. At a 60% true positive rate, CLR identifies 1,079 regulatory interactions, of which 338 were in the previously known network and 741 were novel predictions. We tested the predicted interactions for three transcription factors with chromatin immunoprecipitation, confirming 21 novel interactions and verifying our RegulonDB-based performance estimates. CLR also identified a regulatory link providing central metabolic control of iron transport, which we confirmed with real-time quantitative PCR. The compendium of expression data compiled in this study, coupled with RegulonDB, provides a valuable model system for further improvement of network inference algorithms using experimental data.
In nucleotide excision repair DNA damage is removed through incision of the damaged strand on both sides of the lesion, followed by repair synthesis, which fills the gap using the intact strand as a template, and finally ligation. In prokaryotes the damaged base is removed in a 12-13 nucleotide (nt)-long oligomer; in eukaryotes including humans the damage is excised in a 24-32 nt-long fragment. Excision in Escherichia coli is accomplished by three proteins designated UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC. In humans, by contrast, 16 polypeptides including seven xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) proteins, the trimric replication protein A [RPA, human single-stranded DNA binding protein (HSSB)], and the multisubunit (7-10) general transcription factor TFIIH are required for the dual incisions. Transcribed strands are specifically targeted for excision repair by a transcription-repair coupling factor both in E. coli and in humans. In humans, excision repair is an important defense mechanism against the two major carcinogens, sunlight and cigarette smoke. Individuals defective in excision repair exhibit a high incidence of cancer while individuals with a defect in coupling transcription to repair suffer from neurological and skeletal abnormalities.
Transcription factor Sp1 is a protein present in mammalian cells that binds to GC box promoter elements and selectively activates mRNA synthesis from genes that contain functional recognition sites. We have isolated a cDNA that encodes the 696 C-terminal amino acid residues of human Sp1. By expression of truncated fragments of Sp1 in E. coli, we have localized the DNA binding activity to the C-terminal 168 amino acid residues. In this region, Sp1 has three contiguous Zn(II) finger motifs, which are believed to be metalloprotein structures that interact with DNA. We have found that purified Sp1 requires Zn(II) for sequence-specific binding to DNA. Thus, it is likely that Sp1 interacts with DNA by binding of the Zn(II) fingers. To facilitate the identification of mutant variants of Sp1 that are defective in DNA binding, we have also devised a bacterial colony assay for detection of Sp1 binding to DNA.
We have used an S1 mapping assay to demonstrate that the mRNA transcripts of the Escherichia coli galactose operon found in intact E. coli cells with a defect in adenylate cyclase or the cyclic AMP receptor protein contain at their 5' end about five nucleotides more than the gal mRNA molecules made in wild type cells. The same difference between gal RNA synthesized in vitro in the absence of cyclic AMP or cyclic AMP receptor protein and gal RNA made in the presence of these factors is detected by this assay. Our results strongly suggest that the same two overlapping promoters, which we previously identified by in vitro transcription of gal DNA fragments, also control the expression of the galactose operon in intact cells. The intracellular levels of cyclic AMP determine which promoter is utilized.
An improved method is described for the renaturation of microgram amounts of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. The protein band is visualized in the gel by KCl staining, the band cut out and crushed, and the protein eluted by diffusion in a buffer containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Protein is concentrated and sodium dodecyl sulfate is removed by acetone precipitation of the sample. Renaturation of the protein occurs after the precipitate is dissolved in 6 m guanidine hydrochloride and then diluted. The activity of the sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase can be recovered with 98–100% efficiency after electrophoresis in an SDS-gel and renaturation by this technique. To assess whether the method is generally applicable we tested some or all of the steps involved in the procedure using E. coli transcription termination factor rho, β-galactosidase, alkaline phosphatase, wheat α-amylase, and DNA topoisomerase. We show how the method can be used to determine the approximate molecular weight of the DNA topoisomerase polypeptide by sectioning a gel on which a partially pure sample has been fractionated by electrophoresis.
Much of the information available about factors that affect mRNA decay in Escherichia coli, and by inference in other bacteria, has been gleaned from study of less than 25 of the approximately 4,300 predicted E. coli messages. To investigate these factors more broadly, we examined the half-lives and steady-state abundance of known and predicted E. coli mRNAs at single-gene resolution by using two-color fluorescent DNA microarrays. An rRNA-based strategy for normalization of microarray data was developed to permit quantitation of mRNA decay after transcriptional arrest by rifampicin. We found that globally, mRNA half-lives were similar in nutrient-rich media and defined media in which the generation time was approximately tripled. A wide range of stabilities was observed for individual mRNAs of E. coli, although approximately 80% of all mRNAs had half-lives between 3 and 8 min. Genes having biologically related metabolic functions were commonly observed to have similar stabilities. Whereas the half-lives of a limited number of mRNAs correlated positively with their abundance, we found that overall, increased mRNA stability is not predictive of increased abundance. Neither the density of putative sites of cleavage by RNase E, which is believed to initiate mRNA decay in E. coli, nor the free energy of folding of 5' or 3' untranslated region sequences was predictive of mRNA half-life. Our results identify previously unsuspected features of mRNA decay at a global level and also indicate that generalizations about decay derived from the study of individual gene transcripts may have limited applicability.
The PurR transcription factor plays a critical role in transcriptional regulation of purine metabolism in enterobacteria. Here, we elucidate the role of PurR under exogenous adenine stimulation at the genome-scale using high-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)–chip and gene expression data obtained under in vivo conditions. Analysis of microarray data revealed that adenine stimulation led to changes in transcript level of about 10% of Escherichia coli genes, including the purine biosynthesis pathway. The E. coli strain lacking the purR gene showed that a total of 56 genes are affected by the deletion. From the ChIP–chip analysis, we determined that over 73% of genes directly regulated by PurR were enriched in the biosynthesis, utilization and transport of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, and 20% of them were functionally unknown. Compared to the functional diversity of the regulon of the other general transcription factors in E. coli, the functions and size of the PurR regulon are limited.
▪ Abstract Proteolysis in Escherichia coli serves to rid the cell of abnormal and misfolded proteins and to limit the time and amounts of availability of critical regulatory proteins. Most intracellular proteolysis is initiated by energy-dependent proteases, including Lon, ClpXP, and HflB; HflB is the only essential E. coli protease. The ATPase domains of these proteases mediate substrate recognition. Recognition elements in target are not well defined, but are probably not specific amino acid sequences. Naturally unstable protein substrates include the regulatory sigma factors for heat shock and stationary phase gene expression, σ32 and RpoS. Other cellular proteins serve as environmental sensors that modulate the availability of the unstable proteins to the proteases, resulting in rapid changes in sigma factor levels and therefore in gene transcription. Many of the specific proteases found in E. coli are well-conserved in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and serve critical functions in developmental systems.
We track the motion of individual fluorescently labeled mRNA molecules inside live E. coli cells. We find that the motion is subdiffusive, with an exponent that is robust to physiological changes, including the disruption of cytoskeletal elements. By modifying the parameters of the RNA molecule and the bacterial cell, we are able to examine the possible mechanisms that can lead to this unique type of motion, especially the effect of macromolecular crowding. We also examine the implications of anomalous diffusion on the kinetics of bacterial gene regulation, in particular, how transcription factors find their DNA targets.
Quantitative views of cellular functions require precise measures of rates of biomolecule production, especially proteins-the direct effectors of biological processes. Here, we present a genome-wide approach, based on ribosome profiling, for measuring absolute protein synthesis rates. The resultant E. coli data set transforms our understanding of the extent to which protein synthesis is precisely controlled to optimize function and efficiency. Members of multiprotein complexes are made in precise proportion to their stoichiometry, whereas components of functional modules are produced differentially according to their hierarchical role. Estimates of absolute protein abundance also reveal principles for optimizing design. These include how the level of different types of transcription factors is optimized for rapid response and how a metabolic pathway (methionine biosynthesis) balances production cost with activity requirements. Our studies reveal how general principles, important both for understanding natural systems and for synthesizing new ones, emerge from quantitative analyses of protein synthesis.
▪ Abstract The promoter recognition specificity of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase is modulated by replacement of the σ subunit in the first step and by interaction with transcription factors in the second step. The overall differentiated state of ∼2000 molecules of the RNA polymerase in a single cell can be estimated after measurement of both the intracellular concentrations and the RNA polymerase-binding affinities for all seven species of the σ subunit and 100–150 transcription factors. The anticipated impact from this line of systematic approach is that the prediction of the expression hierarchy of ∼4000 genes on the E. coli genome can be estimated.
ABSTRACT The genome DNA of Escherichia coli is associated with about 10 DNA-binding structural proteins, altogether forming the nucleoid. The nucleoid proteins play some functional roles, besides their structural roles, in the global regulation of such essential DNA functions as replication, recombination, and transcription. Using a quantitative Western blot method, we have performed for the first time a systematic determination of the intracellular concentrations of 12 species of the nucleoid protein in E. coli W3110, including CbpA (curved DNA-binding protein A), CbpB (curved DNA-binding protein B, also known as Rob [right origin binding protein]), DnaA (DNA-binding protein A), Dps (DNA-binding protein from starved cells), Fis (factor for inversion stimulation), Hfq (host factor for phage Q β ), H-NS (histone-like nucleoid structuring protein), HU (heat-unstable nucleoid protein), IciA (inhibitor of chromosome initiation A), IHF (integration host factor), Lrp (leucine-responsive regulatory protein), and StpA (suppressor of td mutant phenotype A). Intracellular protein levels reach a maximum at the growing phase for nine proteins, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Fis, Hfq, H-NS, HU, IciA, Lrp, and StpA, which may play regulatory roles in DNA replication and/or transcription of the growth-related genes. In descending order, the level of accumulation, calculated in monomers, in growing E. coli cells is Fis, Hfq, HU, StpA, H-NS, IHF*, CbpB (Rob), Dps*, Lrp, DnaA, IciA, and CbpA* (stars represent the stationary-phase proteins). The order of abundance, in descending order, in the early stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, HU, Hfq, H-NS, StpA, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, CbpA, and Fis, while that in the late stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, Hfq, HU, CbpA*, StpA, H-NS, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, and Fis. Thus, the major protein components of the nucleoid change from Fis and HU in the growing phase to Dps in the stationary phase. The curved DNA-binding protein, CbpA, appears only in the late stationary phase. These changes in the composition of nucleoid-associated proteins in the stationary phase are accompanied by compaction of the genome DNA and silencing of the genome functions.
The htpR gene of E. coli encodes a positive regulator of the heat-shock response. We have fused the htpR gene to the inducible PL promoter of phage lambda. Overproduction of HtpR following a temperature upshift resulted in the overexpression of heat-shock proteins. We describe the purification and initial in vitro characterization of the factor controlling expression of heat-shock genes. The factor was the 32 kd htpR gene product. In vitro, a mixture of HtpR and core RNA polymerase initiated transcription at heat-shock promoters. The sigma factor encoded by rpoD was not required for this reaction. Therefore, HtpR is a sigma factor that promotes transcription initiation at heat-shock promoters. We propose that htpR be renamed rpoH and that the gene product be called sigma-32.
ABSTRACT The genome-wide location of RNA polymerase binding sites was determined in Escherichia coli using chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays (chIP-chip). Cross-linked chromatin was isolated in triplicate from rifampin-treated cells, and DNA bound to RNA polymerase was precipitated with an antibody specific for the β′ subunit. The DNA was amplified and hybridized to “tiled” oligonucleotide microarrays representing the whole genome at 25-bp resolution. A total of 1,139 binding sites were detected and evaluated by comparison to gene expression data from identical conditions and to 961 promoters previously identified by established methods. Of the detected binding sites, 418 were located within 1,000 bp of a known promoter, leaving 721 previously unknown RNA polymerase binding sites. Within 200 bp, we were able to detect 51% (189/368) of the known σ70-specific promoters occurring upstream of an expressed open reading frame and 74% (273/368) within 1,000 bp. Conversely, many known promoters were not detected by chIP-chip, leading to an estimated 26% negative-detection rate. Most of the detected binding sites could be associated with expressed transcription units, but 299 binding sites occurred near inactive transcription units. This map of RNA polymerase binding sites represents a foundation for studies of transcription factors in E. coli and an important evaluation of the chIP-chip technique.
Abstract Metabolism controls gene expression through allosteric interactions between metabolites and transcription factors. These interactions are usually measured with in vitro assays, but there are no methods to identify them at a genome-scale in vivo. Here we show that dynamic transcriptome and metabolome data identify metabolites that control transcription factors in E. coli . By switching an E. coli culture between starvation and growth, we induce strong metabolite concentration changes and gene expression changes. Using Network Component Analysis we calculate the activities of 209 transcriptional regulators and correlate them with metabolites. This approach captures, for instance, the in vivo kinetics of CRP regulation by cyclic-AMP. By testing correlations between all pairs of transcription factors and metabolites, we predict putative effectors of 71 transcription factors, and validate five interactions in vitro. These results show that combining transcriptomics and metabolomics generates hypotheses about metabolism-transcription interactions that drive transitions between physiological states.
Quorum sensing is a cell-to-cell signalling mechanism in which bacteria secrete hormone-like compounds called autoinducers. When these auto-inducers reach a certain threshold concentration, they interact with bacterial transcriptional regulators, thereby regulating gene expression. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) O157:H7 as well as E. coli K-12 produces the autoinducer-2 (AI-2), which is synthesized by the product of the luxS gene, and previous work from our laboratory has shown that genes encoding the EHEC type III secretion system were activated by quorum sensing. Recently, by hybridizing an E. coli K-12 gene array with cDNA synthesized from RNA extracted from EHEC strain 86-24 and its isogenic luxS mutant, we observed that other potential virulence-associated factors, such as genes encoding the expression and assembly of flagella, motility and chemotaxis, were also activated by quorum sensing. The array data also indicated that several genes encoding putative E. coli regulators were controlled by quorum sensing. In this report, we describe a two-component system regulated by quorum sensing that shares homology with Salmonella typhimurium PmrAB, which we have named quorum sensing E. coli regulator B and C (QseBC). The qseBC genes, previously identified only as open reading frames b3025 and b3026, are organized in an operon in the E. coli chromosome, with qseB encoding the response regulator and qseC the sensor kinase. We confirmed the regulation of qseBC by quorum sensing using qseB::lacZ transcriptional fusions and characterized the phenotypes of an isogenic qseC mutation in EHEC. This mutant expressed less flagellin and had reduced motility compared with the wild-type and complemented strains. Transcription of flhD, fliA, motA and fliC::lacZ fusions was decreased in the qseC mutant, suggesting that qseBC is a transcriptional regulator of flagella genes. A qseC mutant was also generated in E. coli K-12 strain MC1000 that showed the same phenotypes as the EHEC mutant, indicating that qseBC regulates flagella and motility by quorum sensing in both EHEC and K-12. QseBC activates transcription of flhDC, which is the master regulator for the flagella and motility genes and, in the absence of flhD, QseBC failed to activate the transcription of fliA. Motility of a luxS, but not of a qseC, mutant can be restored by providing AI-2 exogenously as preconditioned media, suggesting that the qseC mutant is unable to respond to AI-2. However, QseC has no effect on the expression of other quorum sensing-controlled genes such as those encoding for the type III secretion system. These data indicate that QseBC is one component of the quorum-sensing regulatory cascade in both EHEC and K-12 that is involved in the regulation of flagella and motility genes, but that additional regulators in this cascade remain to be characterized.
sigma E, an RNA polymerase sigma factor of apparent M(r) 28,000, was previously identified by its ability to direct transcription from the P2 promoter of the agarose gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal sequence of purified sigma E, was used to isolate the sigma E gene (sigE). The predicted sequence of sigma E shows greatest similarity to sequences of seven other proteins: Myxococcus xanthus CarQ, Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU, Pseudomonas syringae HrpL, Escherichia coli sigma E, Alcaligenes eutrophus CnrH, E. coli FecI, and Bacillus subtilis SigX, a protein of unknown function. These eight proteins define a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors sufficiently different from other sigma s that, in many cases, they are not identified by standard similarity searching methods. Available information suggests that all of them regulate extracytoplasmic functions and that they function as effector molecules responding to extracytoplasmic stimuli. A. eutrophus CnrH appears to be a plasmid-encoded factor.
Cell-free protein synthesis is becoming a powerful technique to construct and to study complex informational processes in vitro. Engineering synthetic gene circuits in a test tube, however, is seriously limited by the transcription repertoire of modern cell-free systems, composed of only a few bacteriophage regulatory elements. Here, we report the construction and the phenomenological characterization of synthetic gene circuits engineered with a cell-free expression toolbox that works with the seven E. coli sigma factors. The E. coli endogenous holoenzyme E70 is used as the primary transcription machinery. Elementary circuit motifs, such as multiple stage cascades, AND gate and negative feedback loops are constructed with the six other sigma factors, two bacteriophage RNA polymerases, and a set of repressors. The circuit dynamics reveal the importance of the global mRNA turnover rate and of passive competition-induced transcriptional regulation. Cell-free reactions can be carried out over long periods of time with a small-scale dialysis reactor or in phospholipid vesicles, an artificial cell system. This toolbox is a unique platform to study complex transcription/translation-based biochemical systems in vitro.
It has long been known that cell-cell adhesiveness is generally reduced in human cancers. Tumor cells are dissociated throughout the entire tumor masses of diffuse-type cancers, whereas those of solid tumors with high metastatic potentials are often focally dissociated or dedifferentiated at the invading fronts. Thus, both irreversible and reversible mechanisms for inactivating the cell adhesion system appear to exist. This paper focuses on the cadherin system, which mediates Ca2+-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion. The E (epithelial)-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in cancer cells is inactivated by multiple mechanisms corresponding to the pathological features described above. Mutations have been found in the genes for E-cadherin and its undercoat proteins, alpha- and beta-catenins, which connect cadherins to actin filaments and establish firm cell-cell adhesion. Transcriptional inactivation of E-cadherin expression was shown to occur frequently in tumor progression. E-cadherin expression in human cancer cells is regulated by CpG methylation around the promoter region. The cadherin system interacts directly with products of oncogenes, eg, cerbB-2 protein and the epidermal growth factor receptor, and of the tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, through beta-catenin, which may be important in signal transduction pathways contributing to the determination of the biological properties of human cancers. In conclusion, inactivation of the E-cadherin system by multiple mechanisms, including both genetic and epigenetic events, plays a significant role in multistage carcinogenesis.
Focus Review22 May 2012free access The many faces and functions of β-catenin Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Author Information Tomas Valenta1, George Hausmann1 and Konrad Basler 1 1Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland *Corresponding author. Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zurich 8057, Switzerland. Tel.:+41 44 635 3111; Fax:+41 44 635 6864; E-mail: [email protected] The EMBO Journal (2012)31:2714-2736https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.150 PDFDownload PDF of article text and main figures. ToolsAdd to favoritesDownload CitationsTrack CitationsPermissions ShareFacebookTwitterLinked InMendeleyWechatReddit Figures & Info β-Catenin (Armadillo in Drosophila) is a multitasking and evolutionary conserved molecule that in metazoans exerts a crucial role in a multitude of developmental and homeostatic processes. More specifically, β-catenin is an integral structural component of cadherin-based adherens junctions, and the key nuclear effector of canonical Wnt signalling in the nucleus. Imbalance in the structural and signalling properties of β-catenin often results in disease and deregulated growth connected to cancer and metastasis. Intense research into the life of β-catenin has revealed a complex picture. Here, we try to capture the state of the art: we try to summarize and make some sense of the processes that regulate β-catenin, as well as the plethora of β-catenin binding partners. One focus will be the interaction of β-catenin with different transcription factors and the potential implications of these interactions for direct cross-talk between β-catenin and non-Wnt signalling pathways. Introduction Wnt signalling represents one of a few key molecular cascades that regulate cell fate in animals throughout their lifespan. Already during embryonic development Wnt-regulated β-catenin critically contributes to the establishment of the body axis and the orchestration of tissue and organ development. In adult organs, Wnt signalling continues to play indispensable roles in tissue homeostasis, cell renewal, and regeneration. Interaction of Wnt ligands with their receptor complexes triggers several intracellular signalling cascades; these are, traditionally, separated into two types according to the role played by β-catenin. In the canonical Wnt cascade, β-catenin is the key effector responsible for transduction of the signal to the nucleus and it triggers transcription of Wnt-specific genes responsible for the control of cell fate decisions in many cells and tissues. The second type of Wnt signalling is independent of β-catenin signalling function and comprises, among others, the Wnt/PCP (Planar Cell Polarity) and Wnt-dependent/protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathways (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). We will focus here on β-catenin-dependent signalling and refer the interested reader to the following excellent reviews on the other types of Wnt signalling (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). But β-catenin is not just a component of the Wnt signal cascade (Figure 1). In the late 1980s, β-catenin was independently discovered twice, on the basis of its different functions: structural and signalling. The group of Rolf Kemler isolated β-catenin, together with two other molecules (α-catenin and γ-catenin/plakoglobin), as proteins associated with E-cadherin, the key molecule of Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion. These proteins were named catenins (in Latin catena means chain) to reflect their linking of E-cadherin to cytoskeletal structures (Ozawa et al, 1989). The signalling potential of β-catenin was exposed through its Drosophila orthologue Armadillo: the armadillo gene was discovered in the seminal screens for mutations affecting segmentation of the Drosophila embryo, performed by Eric Wieschaus, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, and Gerd Jürgens (Wieschaus et al, 1984). Whereas the wild-type embryonic cuticle contains segments with alternating rows of denticles and naked belts, segments in armadillo mutants form only a lawn of denticles, the naked belts are missing. Such phenotypes resemble wingless null mutants (Wieschaus and Riggleman, 1987). Further analysis of Armadillo performed by the laboratories of Eric Wieschaus, Mark Peifer, and others revealed the conservation of its structural function in adherens junctions (McCrea et al, 1990; Peifer and Wieschaus, 1990; Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). Epistatic analysis determined that the armadillo segmentation function is regulated by Wingless (Riggleman et al, 1990). This finding was a key step in the subsequent characterization of the Wnt/β-catenin (or Wingless/Armadillo, respectively) signalling cascade, and of the functions and mutual interactions of its individual components. Another important part of this mosaic was revealed by the description of the basic pathway leading from the Wingless ligand through Dishevelled to regulation of Armadillo stability by Shaggy/Zeste-white-3 (GSK3 in vertebrates) (Siegfried et al, 1994). Finally in the mid-1990's several groups independently found that the signalling function of β-catenin/Armadillo in the nucleus is mediated via T-cell factor (TCF)/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors, which in association with β-catenin trigger Wnt-mediated transcription (Behrens et al, 1996; Huber et al, 1996; Molenaar et al, 1996; Brunner et al, 1997; van de Wetering et al, 1997). The generation of conditional β-catenin mouse mutants (either knockout or constitutively active) has revealed that a vast array of developmental processes is regulated by the multitasking β-catenin in mammalian embryonic and adult tissues (reviewed in detail by Grigoryan et al, 2008). Figure 1.The life of β-catenin within the cell. Newly synthesized β-catenin is immobilized by E-cadherin at adherens junctions, where it can interact also with α-catenin, thereby indirectly modulating the actin cytoskeleton. β-catenin can be released from the adherens junctions by the activity of protein kinases or by downregulation of E-cadherin. Free excess β-catenin is immediately phosphorylated by the destruction complex and thus marked for subsequent degradation. A portion of β-catenin can be kept in the cytoplasm protected by APC. Wnt signalling blocks the activity of the destruction complex resulting in increased levels of cytolasmic β-catenin, which is translocated to the nucleus. In the nucleus, β-catenin associates with transcription factors from the TCF/Lef family and drives transcription of Wnt/β-catenin target genes. Other factors can also provide β-catenin with a DNA binding platform, often counteracting canonical Wnt signalling. Signalling activity of β-catenin in the nucleus can be regulated by modulating its nuclear import/export. Besides its structural role in the adherens junctions and signalling activity in the nucleus, β-catenin may also play an important function in the centrosome. CTTA, C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators, NTTA, N-Terminal Transcriptional Activators. Download figure Download PowerPoint The many roles of β-catenin beg the question as to how an evolutionarily conserved pathway can control so many varied processes during animal development and tissue homeostasis via one central molecule? Further, how is the final transcriptional output of β-catenin determined and modulated? Part of the explanation might be found in the plethora of β-catenin binding partners that either affect its transcriptional output or permit its direct cross-talk with other transcription factors and signalling pathways. In this review, we will discuss the following aspects: how is the β-catenin protein regulated, how might different transcriptional co-activators of β-catenin lead to diverse outcomes, how can β-catenin affect the activity of various transcription factors, and finally, what are the potential implications of a direct cross-talk between β-catenin and other signalling pathways? The structure of β-catenin determines its role as a scaffold molecule The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is one of a small set of conserved signalling cascades (together with Notch, Hedgehog, TGFβ/BMP, Hippo, and receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated pathways) that regulate animal development from Cnidarians to mammals. β-Catenin's orchestration of developmental processes is the sum of its dual roles—signalling and structural—as elegantly illustrated by the work of Lyashenko et al (2011): mouse Emryonic Stem Cells (mESC) lacking β-catenin lose their ability to differentiate into a mesodermal germ layer and do not form any neuroepithelium; both defects are connected to defective cell–cell junctions arising during the differentiation processes. Putting back a signalling-defective β-catenin restores the integrity of adherens junction and importantly also the ability of mESC to form neuroepithelial structures and endoderm. However the mesoderm formation is not rescued and thus requires also intact β-catenin transcription (Lyashenko et al, 2011). Similarly in the developing dorsal neural tube and the migrating population of neural crest cells the loss of β-catenin results in more drastic phenotypes than only blocking the β-catenin signalling outputs, further showing that the two roles of β-catenin cause an additive effect (Valenta et al, 2011). Such overlap and possible separation of β-catenin roles was also demonstrated in a seminal analysis in Drosophila more than a decade ago (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). How can the β-catenin protein mediate both distinct adhesive and signalling activities? The answer is in the structural composition of β-catenin. The β-catenin protein (781 aa residues in humans) consists of a central region (residues 141–664) made up of 12 imperfect Armadillo repeats (R1–12) that are flanked by distinct N- and C-terminal domains, NTD and CTD, respectively. A specific conserved helix (Helix-C) is located proximally to the CTD, adjacent to the last ARM repeat (residues 667–683) (Xing et al, 2008; Figure 2). The NTD and the CTD may be structurally flexible, whereas the central region forms a relatively rigid scaffold. This scaffold serves as an interaction platform for many β-catenin binding partners, at the membrane, in cytosol, and in the nucleus (Huber et al, 1997). Figure 2.β-Catenin serves as a binding platform for a multitude of interaction partners in adherens junctions, in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. (A) The β-catenin protein consists of a central region composed of 12 Armadillo repeats (numbered boxes), flanked by an amino-terminal domain (NTD) and a carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). Between the last Armadillo repeat and the flexible part of the CTD is the conserved helix-C (C). Coloured bars show experimentally validated binding sites for β-catenin interaction partners. Colour code: purple, components of adherens junctions; blue, members of the β-catenin destruction complex; red, transcriptional co-activators; green, transcription factors providing DNA binding; gray, transcriptional inhibitors. C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators (CTTA), the critical domain for their binding is marked by brackets. Little circles indicate phosphorylation sites on either E-cadherin or APC that enhance the interactions. APC, Adenoma Polyposis Coli; TCF/Lef, T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer factor; AR, Androgen Receptor; LRH-1, Liver Receptor Homologue-1; ICAT, Inhibitor of β-catenin and TCF; BCL9, B-cell lymphoma-9. (B) The C-terminus of β-catenin serves as a binding factor for a multitude of complexes promoting β-catenin-mediated transcription. Experimentally validated binding motifs for particular proteins are indicated. In the grey boxes, the function is indicated of the particular β-catenin interactor or of a complex, where this binding partner is a member. Brg-1 is also known as SMARCA4, CBP as CREBBP. HAT, histone acetyl-transferase; HMT, histone methyl-transferase; MLL, mixed lineage leukaemia; PAF-1, Polymerase-associated factor-1; PIC, Pre-Initiation Complex; TBP, TATA-box Binding Protein; TRRAP, Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein. Download figure Download PowerPoint β-Catenin is a founding member of the Armadillo (ARM) repeat protein superfamily. Each ARM repeat of its central region comprises ∼42 residues, forming three helices arranged in triangular shape. Together, all ARM repeats form a superhelix that features a long, positively charged groove. Biochemical and crystal structure analyses revealed that many of β-catenin's binding partners share overlapping binding sites in the groove of the central β-catenin region: consequently, these partners cannot bind to β-catenin simultaneously. This mutual exclusivity is certainly valid for the key β-catenin interacting molecules: E-cadherin (the main partner in adherens junctions), APC (the main partner in the destruction complex), and TCF/Lef (the main partner in the nucleus). All these β-catenin interactors bind to the core binding site comprising ARM repeats R3–R9, where they form salt bridges with two key amino-acid residues, Lys312 and Lys435. Other ARM repeats are also involved, at least in strengthening the interaction (Graham et al, 2000; Eklof Spink et al, 2001; Huber and Weis, 2001; Poy et al, 2001). The spatial segregation of the different β-catenin binding partners within the cell may be important for enabling the function of these proteins. However, the competition among them for β-catenin is also important for regulating canonical Wnt signalling. Conformational changes of β-catenin may also help regulate its binding properties: the terminal regions of β-catenin (NTD and especially CTD) have been proposed to fold back on the central region affecting, for example, the binding of TCF/Lef (Castaño et al, 2002; Solanas et al, 2004). Biochemical evidence supports the model that β-catenin-mediated transcription is performed by a monomeric, back-folded form of β-catenin, whereas a cadherin-binding dimeric form is associated with α-catenin in adherens junctions (Gottardi and Gumbiner, 2004). Interestingly, Helix-C within the most N-terminal part of the CTD was shown to be essential for the signalling activity of β-catenin, while being completely dispensable for its role in cell–cell adhesion (Xing et al, 2008). This is not surprising, as a plethora of β-catenin transcriptional co-activators require an intact Helix-C (or region R12-Helix-C) for their proper binding (Figure 2; Mosimann et al, 2009). The crucial role of this part of β-catenin was predicted and experimentally demonstrated more than a decade ago by elegant in-vivo analyses of different mutants of Armadillo (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). In these studies, mutants of Armadillo (point mutations or deletions) were produced, some interfered with the adhesion function, but not with its role in Wnt signalling, and vice versa: revealing that the two functions of Arm are separable. Some of these mutations specifically hit Helix-C and abrogated the signalling role but perfectly preserved the structural function of Armadillo. Recently, the ability to completely block the signalling output of Armadillo, without affecting its adhesive role, was confirmed and experimentally extended to β-catenin in mice (Valenta et al, 2011). Interestingly, the functional separation of the two roles occurred evolutionarily in Caenorhabdidis elegans. This nematode has at least three specialized β-catenins: the adhesion-specific HMP-2 that binds cadherins but not TCFs, and two signalling ones, BAR-1 and WRM-1, that can bind TCFs and regulate transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Yet another C. elegans protein, SYS-1, has adopted a signalling role, although it is not related to β-catenin on the sequence level. SYS-1 structurally mimics β-catenin (the positively charged groove), interacts with TCFs, and even mediates transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Such examples of functional separation, however, appear to be the exception. In the majority of animal species (including the model organisms Drosophila, Xenopus, and mouse), a single β-catenin carries out the two functions. These functions may be carried out by different protein pools and are orchestrated by mechanisms (e.g., post-translational modifications), which control the spatial separation, retention, or stability of β-catenin. That said, in vertebrates γ-catenin (plakoglobin), a close relative of β-catenin, may in certain cases compensate for the loss of β-catenin's structural function; in contrast, the signalling role of β-catenin in vivo seems not to be compensated (Huelsken et al, 2000; Grigoryan et al, 2008). The role of plakoglobin in Wnt/β-catenin signalling warrants further clarification. β-Catenin is an evolutionarily conserved protein The usually single β-catenin gene represents the highly conserved centre piece within the complex expanded Wnt signalling pathway (Figure 3). The Wnt pathway features a multitude of paralogous components, especially at the level of Wnt ligands and their receptors. The complexity at the level of the Wnt ligands and receptors (Frizzled proteins) seems to have arisen early in metazoan evolution. In Cnidarians, 14 Wnt genes have been identified which belong to 12 of the 13 known different Wnt subfamilies, 11 of which are also present in vertebrates, where some additional duplication events within individual subfamilies lead to expression of up to 19 different Wnts in mammals (Kusserow et al, 2005). In sponges (Porifera), which constitute some of the most basal metazoans, the Wnt ligand complexity is not as high, only three (respectively two) Wnt ligands are known (Lapébie et al, 2009; Adamska et al, 2010). Figure 3.β-Catenin is an evolutionarily ancient molecule that provided its function before Wnt signalling and classical cadherin-based adhesion appeared. Schematic evolutionary tree showing the relationships among Amoebozoa (represented by Dictyostelium discoideum) and metazoa, as well as the diversity of signalling components. In Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin acts as a functional molecule in polarized epithelia. In animals (metazoa), β-catenin plays a dual role as a signalling component of canonical Wnt signalling or as a structural component of cadherin-based cell–cell junctions. The presence of β-catenin and key components of adherens junctions (classical cadherins—containing an intracellular domain binding to β-catenin) and of canonical Wnt signalling (Wnt ligands, TCF/Lef transcription factors) is indicated to the right. In the case of Wnt ligands, the first number indicates how many different Wnt ligands were determined, the second number in brackets indicates how many Wnt subfamilies were determined in a particular group. The number in the case of TCF/Lef refers to how many different TCF/Lef proteins were found. Yes means presence, no absence. The following animal species were compared: Porifera (Sponges): Amphimedon queenslandica, Cnidaria: Nematostella vectans, Insects: Drosophila melanogaster; Vertebrates: Mus musculus. Download figure Download PowerPoint In sponges, ctenophores, and cnidarians, one gene encodes a β-catenin protein with striking sequence similarity to mammalian β-catenin. Cnidarian β-catenin (e.g., of the polyp Hydra) exhibits >60% of amino-acid identity with mammalian β-catenin, with the main differences being found in the most C-terminal part, which is generally less conserved (Xing et al, 2008; Zhao et al, 2011). The structural identity of the repeat domain of β-catenin is nearly 80%. Moreover, locus conservation among sponges (Amphimedon sp.), cnidarians (sea anemone Nematostella vectans) and later developed metazoans (Deuterostomia; vertebrates belong to this group) includes even the exon/intron features of the β-catenin gene (Holland et al, 2005; Adamska et al, 2010). Highlighting the pivotal role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling also in early metazoans are findings that changes in β-catenin levels dramatically impact their development. In sponges (Porifera), the activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling by blocking β-catenin degradation leads to the formation of ectopic ostia (canal openings), which can disrupt feeding (Lapébie et al, 2009). In Hydra (Cnidaria), ectopic stabilization of β-catenin results in multiple head and tentacle formation along the body, while the opposite phenotype, a loss of head structures, results from depletion of β-catenin (Broun et al, 2005; Müller et al, 2007; Gee et al, 2010). Such observations suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signalling represents a primeval component, driving metazoan body plan and axis formation since the beginning of animal evolution. The critical role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling for establishing the primary body axis (Petersen and Reddien, 2009), or more precisely A/P (anterior/posterior) identity, has been long studied in diverse organisms. It is a re-occuring theme and reveals itself either in individual (para)segments, as in the Drosophila embryo, or of whole developing body plans, such as in vertebrates (Sanson, 2001; Niehrs, 2010). A paradigmatic example showing the indispensable role of β-catenin in the process of axial patterning came from experiments in the amphibian Xenopus laevis: ectopic expression of β-catenin in ventral blastomeres of Xenopus embryos induces axis duplication (i.e., the formation of a secondary axis), a phenotype reminiscent of misexpression of several Wnt ligands (Guger and Gumbiner, 1995). Depletion of β-catenin results in the opposite effect, ventralization of the embryo with a shortened A/P axis (Haesman et al, 1994). A/P axis identity and mesoderm formation is controlled by β-catenin-mediated transcription also in mammals, since mouse embryos lacking β-catenin do not develop a proper A/P axis and fail to form mesoderm, resulting in corrupted gastrulation (Haegel et al, 1995; Huelsken et al, 2000). Interestingly, a homologue of β-catenin was found also in the non-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum (slime mould) (Coates et al, 2002). This contrasts with the lack of Wnt ligands, and indeed of most proteins involved in Wnt signalling, which so far have been identified solely in metazoans but not in any other phyla (Figure 3). In normal circumstances, Dictyostelium discoideum is a unicellular organism; but in response to starvation single cells start to aggregate and form fruiting bodies, which comprise a rigid stalk and on its tip a collection of spores. During the formation of a fruiting body the aggregated cells establish a polarized epithelium that is essential for the subsequent multicellular phase of development. Even though Dictyostelium discoideum, in contrast to metazoans, lacks classical cadherins, the β-catenin orthologue Aardvark is an essential structural molecule in the polarized epithelia. Moreover, to maintain the proper epithelial structure Aardvark cooperates with α-catenin, another key structural molecule known from metazoans. Ddα-catenin is upregulated during the transition to multicellularity and colocalizes with Aardvark and F-actin at the sites of cell–cell contact. Loss or knockdown of either Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin or Ddα-catenin significantly compromises epithelial morphology, polarity, and formation of fruiting bodies (Dickinson et al, 2011). Thus, β-catenin, together with α-catenin and most likely actin, can promote primitive cell–cell contacts even without cadherins. These observations suggest that the principles underlying metazoan multicellularity may be more ancient than previously thought and that the structural role of β-catenin precedes its signalling role in the canonical Wnt pathway—β-catenin and α-catenin were engaged in the formation of polarized epithelia before classical catenins came on the scene in metazoans. However, even in Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin is not exclusively a structural molecule. In response to cAMP, a series of events leads to phosphorylation of GSK3, an orthologue of GSKA that phosphorylates Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin. This phosphorylation event activates Aardvark and leads to gene transcription via a so far unknown mechanism, as there are no TCF/Lef transcription factors in Dictyostelium discoideum (Grimson et al, 2000). Even though the mechanism seems different from the core Wnt/β-catenin pathway (phosphorylation leads to activation, not to degradation), at least the interaction between β-catenin and GSK3 is present and may have further evolved into the mode of action typical for canonical Wnt signalling. Canonical signalling in a nutshell Without a Wnt signal, the levels of cytoplasmic free β-catenin are kept low (Figure 1). If not bound to E-cadherin, β-catenin is phosphorylated in the cytoplasm by the activity of a multiprotein destruction complex, marking β-catenin for degradation. This complex consists of the scaffold proteins Axin and Adenoma Polyposis Coli (APC), and of the kinases phosphorylating β-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), casein kinase 1 (CK1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) (Kimelman and Xu, 2006). The binding of Wnt ligands to the Frizzled transmembrane receptors and LRP5/6 co-receptors (Low density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein) starts a series of molecular events leading to inhibition of the β-catenin destruction complex. Ligand activated Frizzled receptors recruit the cytoplasmic protein Dishevelled (Dvl) to the receptor complex through direct binding; Dvl subsequently multimerizes and induces formation of so-called LRP-associated Wnt signalosomes (Bilic et al, 2007). Dvl in turn recruits the rate-limiting component Axin (most likely together with associated kinases, such as GSK3) and thus destabilizes the β-catenin destruction complex (Schwarz-Romond et al, 2007). Dvl-mediated phosporylation of LRP5/6 by CK1 is key for proper functioning of the Wnt signalosome as it leads to a block of GSK3 kinase activity (Zeng et al, 2008). Unphosphorylated β-catenin escapes degradation, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and translocates to the nucleus. Nuclear β-catenin associates with DNA-binding transcription factors of the TCF/Lef family. TCF/Lef proteins possess only limited ability to activate transcription. In the absence of Wnt signals, TCF/Lef factors act as transcriptional repressors. The binding of β-catenin converts TCF/Lef proteins into bipartite TCF/β-catenin transcriptional activators, converting the Wnt signal into the transcription of specific target genes (Najdi et al, 2011; Archbold et al, 2012). Albeit elegant, recent work has made clear that such a simplified, linear scheme describing the translation of the Wnt signal via β-catenin into a cell-specific genetic program does not capture the full complexity of β-catenin-mediated functions within Wnt receiving cells. β-Catenin at the membrane: balancing adhesion and signalling The majority of β-catenin is located at the cytoplasmic side of the membrane as a component of cadherin-based cell–cell connections in the absence of a Wnt stimulus. Cadherin-based adherens junctions contribute to forming polarized epithelial tissues, a characteristic metazoan feature necessary for maintaining organismal integrity (Meng and Takeichi, 2009). Cadherins are single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins that engage in Ca2+-dependent homotypic interactions via their extracellular regions and that also link to β-catenin through their cytoplasmic tails. Classical cadherins were named for the tissue in which they were most prominently expressed: for example, epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) in epithelial cells; neural cadherin (N-cadherin) in the nervous system. Many cell types co-express several cadherins (Meng and Takeichi, 2009; Stepniak et al, 2009). β-Catenin can interact with the cytoplasmic domain of all of them, but most studied are the functional consequences of the β-catenin–E-cadherin interaction. The cadherin–β-catenin interaction is constitutive and may occur even in single isolated cells in an adhesion-independent way (Stepniak et al, 2009). Newly synthesized E-cadherin associates with β-catenin while still in the endoplasmic reticulum and the two proteins move together to the cell membrane. Interfering with the binding of β-catenin to E-cadherin results in proteasomal degradation of the cadherin, because β-catenin shields a PEST sequence motif on E-cadherin, which, if free, is recognized by a ubiquitin ligase that marks E-cadherin for degradation (Hinc et al, 1994). Reciprocally, E-cadherin association stabilizes β-catenin by preventing binding of components of the β-catenin destruction complex (namely APC and Axin) (Huber and Weis, 2001). At cadherin-based cell–cell junctions, β-catenin can bind α-catenin with distal parts of the NTD and the adjacent first ARM repeat of β-catenin close to a hinge region around Arg151 (Figure 2; Pokutta and Weis 2000; Xing et al, 2008). In close proximity, C-terminal to this hinge, is the binding site for BCL9, an important transcriptional co-activator of β-catenin (Hoffm
In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the production of many virulence factors and secondary metabolites is regulated in concert with cell density through quorum sensing. Two quorum-sensing regulons have been identified in which the LuxR homologues LasR and RhlR are activated by N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (OdDHL) and N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (BHL) respectively. The lasR and rhlR genes are linked to the luxl homologues lasl and rhll, which are responsible for synthesis of OdDHL and BHL, respectively. As lasRl and rhlRl are both involved in regulating synthesis of exoenzymes such as elastase, we sought to determine the nature of their interrelationship. By using lacZ transcriptional fusions in both homologous (P. aeruginosa) and heterologous (Escherichia coli) genetic backgrounds we provide evidence that (i) lasR is expressed constitutively throughout the growth cycle, (ii) rhlR expression is regulated by LasR/OdDHL, and (iii) that RhlR/BHL regulates rhll. We also show that expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor gene rpoS is abolished in a P. aeruginosa lasR mutant and in the pleiotropic BHL-negative mutant PANO67. Furthermore, our data reveal that kin E. coli, an rpoS-lacZ fusion is regulated directly by RhlR/BHL. Taken together, these results indicate that P. aeruginosa employs a multilayered hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade involving RhlR/BHL and LasR/OdDHL, interlinked via RpoS, to integrate the regulation of virulence determinants and secondary metabolites with adaptation and survival in the stationary phase.
The small nucleotides pppGpp and ppGpp (or (p)ppGpp) are rapidly synthesized in response to nutritional stress. In Escherichia coli, the enzymes RelA and SpoT are triggered by different starvation signals to produce (p)ppGpp. In many Gram-positive bacteria this is carried out by RelA and two small homologs. (p)ppGpp, along with the transcription factor DksA, has profound effects on transcription initiation in E. coli. (p)ppGpp/DksA exert differential effects on promoters by playing upon their intrinsic kinetic parameters, and by facilitating the utilization of alternative sigma factors. (p)ppGpp also regulates replication and translation. These studies highlight (p)ppGpp as a key factor in bacterial physiology that responds rapidly to diverse stresses, by shutting down growth and priming cellular defensive and adaptive processes.
Bacteria often cope with environmental stress by inducing alternative sigma (sigma) factors, which direct RNA polymerase to specific promoters, thereby inducing a set of genes called a regulon to combat the stress. To understand the conserved and organism-specific functions of each sigma, it is necessary to be able to predict their promoters, so that their regulons can be followed across species. However, the variability of promoter sequences and motif spacing makes their prediction difficult. We developed and validated an accurate promoter prediction model for Escherichia coli sigmaE, which enabled us to predict a total of 89 unique sigmaE-controlled transcription units in E. coli K-12 and eight related genomes. SigmaE controls the envelope stress response in E. coli K-12. The portion of the regulon conserved across genomes is functionally coherent, ensuring the synthesis, assembly, and homeostasis of lipopolysaccharide and outer membrane porins, the key constituents of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The larger variable portion is predicted to perform pathogenesis-associated functions, suggesting that sigmaE provides organism-specific functions necessary for optimal host interaction. The success of our promoter prediction model for sigmaE suggests that it will be applicable for the prediction of promoter elements for many alternative sigma factors.
The yeast heat shock transcription factor gene, HSF1, has been isolated from an S. cerevisiae genomic expression library (in lambda gt11). The sequenced gene encodes an 833 amino acid protein having a mass of 93,218 daltons. Expression of specific DNA-binding activity in E. coli and of transcriptional activity in yeast confirmed the identity of the cloned gene. Southern analysis and gene-disruption experiments indicate that the heat shock transcription factor is encoded by a single-copy, essential gene. The DNA-binding domain was localized to a 118 amino acid region in the amino-terminal third of the protein. Inspection of the DNA-binding domain reveals no resemblance to any currently known secondary structural motifs implicated in DNA recognition and binding.
Upon exposure to oxygen, Escherichia coli increases the expression of enzymes essential for aerobic respiration, such as components of the TCA cycle and terminal oxidase complexes. This increase requires the elimination of repression mediated by the Arc regulatory system under anaerobic conditions. Coordinately, the synthesis of enzymes that function in anaerobic processes such as fermentation decreases, partly due to the inactivation of the transcription factor Fnr. E. coli is thus able to adjust the levels of respiratory enzymes to fit its environmental circumstances, and in this case, reduces the production of the less energy efficient fermentation enzymes in favor of the aerobic pathways. In contrast to the advantage in energy production, aerobiosis brings a disadvantage to E. coli: the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e.superoxide anion radical (O2·- hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (·OH). These byproducts of aerobic respiration damage many biological molecules, including DNA, proteins, and lipids. To alleviate the toxicity of these compounds, E. coli induces the synthesis of protective enzymes, such as Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (SodA) and catalase I (HP I), and this induction is controlled by the regulatory proteins SoxRS, OxyR, and ArcAB. Thus, ArcAB, Fnr, SoxRS, and OxyR function in concert so that E. coli can optimize its energy production and growth rate. Fnr and SoxRS are cytoplasmic, DNA-binding proteins, and these regulatory systems utilize iron-sulfur clusters as cofactors which may directly sense the redox environment. OxyR is also a cytoplasmic, DNA-binding protein, and appears to respond to redox potential through the oxidation state of a specific cysteine residue. In the ArcAB system (which belongs to the family of two-component regulatory systems), ArcB, a membrane protein, functions as the sensor, and ArcA, a DNA-binding protein, directly controls target gene expression. Under anaerobic conditions, ArcB undergoes autophosphorylation and transphosphorylates ArcA, stimulating ArcA's DNA-binding activity. During aerobic growth, the transphosphorylation of ArcA does not occur. In this signal transduction mechanism, the ArcB C-terminal or “receiver” domain plays a critical role; that is, it stimulates or abolishes the transphosphorylation depending on the metabolic state of the cell, which in turn is influenced by the availability of oxygen. E. coli thus employs at least four global regulatory systems which monitor the cellular oxidative/metabolic conditions, and adjust the expression of more than 70 operons to give the organism a better aerobic life.
Machine learning approaches offer the potential to systematically identify transcriptional regulatory interactions from a compendium of microarray expression profiles. However, experimental validation of the performance of these methods at the genome scale has remained elusive. Here we assess the global performance of four existing classes of inference algorithms using 445 Escherichia coli Affymetrix arrays and 3,216 known E. coli regulatory interactions from RegulonDB. We also developed and applied the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm, a novel extension of the relevance networks class of algorithms. CLR demonstrates an average precision gain of 36% relative to the next-best performing algorithm. At a 60% true positive rate, CLR identifies 1,079 regulatory interactions, of which 338 were in the previously known network and 741 were novel predictions. We tested the predicted interactions for three transcription factors with chromatin immunoprecipitation, confirming 21 novel interactions and verifying our RegulonDB-based performance estimates. CLR also identified a regulatory link providing central metabolic control of iron transport, which we confirmed with real-time quantitative PCR. The compendium of expression data compiled in this study, coupled with RegulonDB, provides a valuable model system for further improvement of network inference algorithms using experimental data.
In nucleotide excision repair DNA damage is removed through incision of the damaged strand on both sides of the lesion, followed by repair synthesis, which fills the gap using the intact strand as a template, and finally ligation. In prokaryotes the damaged base is removed in a 12-13 nucleotide (nt)-long oligomer; in eukaryotes including humans the damage is excised in a 24-32 nt-long fragment. Excision in Escherichia coli is accomplished by three proteins designated UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC. In humans, by contrast, 16 polypeptides including seven xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) proteins, the trimric replication protein A [RPA, human single-stranded DNA binding protein (HSSB)], and the multisubunit (7-10) general transcription factor TFIIH are required for the dual incisions. Transcribed strands are specifically targeted for excision repair by a transcription-repair coupling factor both in E. coli and in humans. In humans, excision repair is an important defense mechanism against the two major carcinogens, sunlight and cigarette smoke. Individuals defective in excision repair exhibit a high incidence of cancer while individuals with a defect in coupling transcription to repair suffer from neurological and skeletal abnormalities.
Transcription factor Sp1 is a protein present in mammalian cells that binds to GC box promoter elements and selectively activates mRNA synthesis from genes that contain functional recognition sites. We have isolated a cDNA that encodes the 696 C-terminal amino acid residues of human Sp1. By expression of truncated fragments of Sp1 in E. coli, we have localized the DNA binding activity to the C-terminal 168 amino acid residues. In this region, Sp1 has three contiguous Zn(II) finger motifs, which are believed to be metalloprotein structures that interact with DNA. We have found that purified Sp1 requires Zn(II) for sequence-specific binding to DNA. Thus, it is likely that Sp1 interacts with DNA by binding of the Zn(II) fingers. To facilitate the identification of mutant variants of Sp1 that are defective in DNA binding, we have also devised a bacterial colony assay for detection of Sp1 binding to DNA.
We have used an S1 mapping assay to demonstrate that the mRNA transcripts of the Escherichia coli galactose operon found in intact E. coli cells with a defect in adenylate cyclase or the cyclic AMP receptor protein contain at their 5' end about five nucleotides more than the gal mRNA molecules made in wild type cells. The same difference between gal RNA synthesized in vitro in the absence of cyclic AMP or cyclic AMP receptor protein and gal RNA made in the presence of these factors is detected by this assay. Our results strongly suggest that the same two overlapping promoters, which we previously identified by in vitro transcription of gal DNA fragments, also control the expression of the galactose operon in intact cells. The intracellular levels of cyclic AMP determine which promoter is utilized.
An improved method is described for the renaturation of microgram amounts of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. The protein band is visualized in the gel by KCl staining, the band cut out and crushed, and the protein eluted by diffusion in a buffer containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Protein is concentrated and sodium dodecyl sulfate is removed by acetone precipitation of the sample. Renaturation of the protein occurs after the precipitate is dissolved in 6 m guanidine hydrochloride and then diluted. The activity of the sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase can be recovered with 98–100% efficiency after electrophoresis in an SDS-gel and renaturation by this technique. To assess whether the method is generally applicable we tested some or all of the steps involved in the procedure using E. coli transcription termination factor rho, β-galactosidase, alkaline phosphatase, wheat α-amylase, and DNA topoisomerase. We show how the method can be used to determine the approximate molecular weight of the DNA topoisomerase polypeptide by sectioning a gel on which a partially pure sample has been fractionated by electrophoresis.
Much of the information available about factors that affect mRNA decay in Escherichia coli, and by inference in other bacteria, has been gleaned from study of less than 25 of the approximately 4,300 predicted E. coli messages. To investigate these factors more broadly, we examined the half-lives and steady-state abundance of known and predicted E. coli mRNAs at single-gene resolution by using two-color fluorescent DNA microarrays. An rRNA-based strategy for normalization of microarray data was developed to permit quantitation of mRNA decay after transcriptional arrest by rifampicin. We found that globally, mRNA half-lives were similar in nutrient-rich media and defined media in which the generation time was approximately tripled. A wide range of stabilities was observed for individual mRNAs of E. coli, although approximately 80% of all mRNAs had half-lives between 3 and 8 min. Genes having biologically related metabolic functions were commonly observed to have similar stabilities. Whereas the half-lives of a limited number of mRNAs correlated positively with their abundance, we found that overall, increased mRNA stability is not predictive of increased abundance. Neither the density of putative sites of cleavage by RNase E, which is believed to initiate mRNA decay in E. coli, nor the free energy of folding of 5' or 3' untranslated region sequences was predictive of mRNA half-life. Our results identify previously unsuspected features of mRNA decay at a global level and also indicate that generalizations about decay derived from the study of individual gene transcripts may have limited applicability.
The PurR transcription factor plays a critical role in transcriptional regulation of purine metabolism in enterobacteria. Here, we elucidate the role of PurR under exogenous adenine stimulation at the genome-scale using high-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)–chip and gene expression data obtained under in vivo conditions. Analysis of microarray data revealed that adenine stimulation led to changes in transcript level of about 10% of Escherichia coli genes, including the purine biosynthesis pathway. The E. coli strain lacking the purR gene showed that a total of 56 genes are affected by the deletion. From the ChIP–chip analysis, we determined that over 73% of genes directly regulated by PurR were enriched in the biosynthesis, utilization and transport of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, and 20% of them were functionally unknown. Compared to the functional diversity of the regulon of the other general transcription factors in E. coli, the functions and size of the PurR regulon are limited.
▪ Abstract Proteolysis in Escherichia coli serves to rid the cell of abnormal and misfolded proteins and to limit the time and amounts of availability of critical regulatory proteins. Most intracellular proteolysis is initiated by energy-dependent proteases, including Lon, ClpXP, and HflB; HflB is the only essential E. coli protease. The ATPase domains of these proteases mediate substrate recognition. Recognition elements in target are not well defined, but are probably not specific amino acid sequences. Naturally unstable protein substrates include the regulatory sigma factors for heat shock and stationary phase gene expression, σ32 and RpoS. Other cellular proteins serve as environmental sensors that modulate the availability of the unstable proteins to the proteases, resulting in rapid changes in sigma factor levels and therefore in gene transcription. Many of the specific proteases found in E. coli are well-conserved in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and serve critical functions in developmental systems.
We track the motion of individual fluorescently labeled mRNA molecules inside live E. coli cells. We find that the motion is subdiffusive, with an exponent that is robust to physiological changes, including the disruption of cytoskeletal elements. By modifying the parameters of the RNA molecule and the bacterial cell, we are able to examine the possible mechanisms that can lead to this unique type of motion, especially the effect of macromolecular crowding. We also examine the implications of anomalous diffusion on the kinetics of bacterial gene regulation, in particular, how transcription factors find their DNA targets.
Quantitative views of cellular functions require precise measures of rates of biomolecule production, especially proteins-the direct effectors of biological processes. Here, we present a genome-wide approach, based on ribosome profiling, for measuring absolute protein synthesis rates. The resultant E. coli data set transforms our understanding of the extent to which protein synthesis is precisely controlled to optimize function and efficiency. Members of multiprotein complexes are made in precise proportion to their stoichiometry, whereas components of functional modules are produced differentially according to their hierarchical role. Estimates of absolute protein abundance also reveal principles for optimizing design. These include how the level of different types of transcription factors is optimized for rapid response and how a metabolic pathway (methionine biosynthesis) balances production cost with activity requirements. Our studies reveal how general principles, important both for understanding natural systems and for synthesizing new ones, emerge from quantitative analyses of protein synthesis.
▪ Abstract The promoter recognition specificity of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase is modulated by replacement of the σ subunit in the first step and by interaction with transcription factors in the second step. The overall differentiated state of ∼2000 molecules of the RNA polymerase in a single cell can be estimated after measurement of both the intracellular concentrations and the RNA polymerase-binding affinities for all seven species of the σ subunit and 100–150 transcription factors. The anticipated impact from this line of systematic approach is that the prediction of the expression hierarchy of ∼4000 genes on the E. coli genome can be estimated.
ABSTRACT The genome DNA of Escherichia coli is associated with about 10 DNA-binding structural proteins, altogether forming the nucleoid. The nucleoid proteins play some functional roles, besides their structural roles, in the global regulation of such essential DNA functions as replication, recombination, and transcription. Using a quantitative Western blot method, we have performed for the first time a systematic determination of the intracellular concentrations of 12 species of the nucleoid protein in E. coli W3110, including CbpA (curved DNA-binding protein A), CbpB (curved DNA-binding protein B, also known as Rob [right origin binding protein]), DnaA (DNA-binding protein A), Dps (DNA-binding protein from starved cells), Fis (factor for inversion stimulation), Hfq (host factor for phage Q β ), H-NS (histone-like nucleoid structuring protein), HU (heat-unstable nucleoid protein), IciA (inhibitor of chromosome initiation A), IHF (integration host factor), Lrp (leucine-responsive regulatory protein), and StpA (suppressor of td mutant phenotype A). Intracellular protein levels reach a maximum at the growing phase for nine proteins, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Fis, Hfq, H-NS, HU, IciA, Lrp, and StpA, which may play regulatory roles in DNA replication and/or transcription of the growth-related genes. In descending order, the level of accumulation, calculated in monomers, in growing E. coli cells is Fis, Hfq, HU, StpA, H-NS, IHF*, CbpB (Rob), Dps*, Lrp, DnaA, IciA, and CbpA* (stars represent the stationary-phase proteins). The order of abundance, in descending order, in the early stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, HU, Hfq, H-NS, StpA, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, CbpA, and Fis, while that in the late stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, Hfq, HU, CbpA*, StpA, H-NS, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, and Fis. Thus, the major protein components of the nucleoid change from Fis and HU in the growing phase to Dps in the stationary phase. The curved DNA-binding protein, CbpA, appears only in the late stationary phase. These changes in the composition of nucleoid-associated proteins in the stationary phase are accompanied by compaction of the genome DNA and silencing of the genome functions.
The htpR gene of E. coli encodes a positive regulator of the heat-shock response. We have fused the htpR gene to the inducible PL promoter of phage lambda. Overproduction of HtpR following a temperature upshift resulted in the overexpression of heat-shock proteins. We describe the purification and initial in vitro characterization of the factor controlling expression of heat-shock genes. The factor was the 32 kd htpR gene product. In vitro, a mixture of HtpR and core RNA polymerase initiated transcription at heat-shock promoters. The sigma factor encoded by rpoD was not required for this reaction. Therefore, HtpR is a sigma factor that promotes transcription initiation at heat-shock promoters. We propose that htpR be renamed rpoH and that the gene product be called sigma-32.
ABSTRACT The genome-wide location of RNA polymerase binding sites was determined in Escherichia coli using chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays (chIP-chip). Cross-linked chromatin was isolated in triplicate from rifampin-treated cells, and DNA bound to RNA polymerase was precipitated with an antibody specific for the β′ subunit. The DNA was amplified and hybridized to “tiled” oligonucleotide microarrays representing the whole genome at 25-bp resolution. A total of 1,139 binding sites were detected and evaluated by comparison to gene expression data from identical conditions and to 961 promoters previously identified by established methods. Of the detected binding sites, 418 were located within 1,000 bp of a known promoter, leaving 721 previously unknown RNA polymerase binding sites. Within 200 bp, we were able to detect 51% (189/368) of the known σ70-specific promoters occurring upstream of an expressed open reading frame and 74% (273/368) within 1,000 bp. Conversely, many known promoters were not detected by chIP-chip, leading to an estimated 26% negative-detection rate. Most of the detected binding sites could be associated with expressed transcription units, but 299 binding sites occurred near inactive transcription units. This map of RNA polymerase binding sites represents a foundation for studies of transcription factors in E. coli and an important evaluation of the chIP-chip technique.
Abstract Metabolism controls gene expression through allosteric interactions between metabolites and transcription factors. These interactions are usually measured with in vitro assays, but there are no methods to identify them at a genome-scale in vivo. Here we show that dynamic transcriptome and metabolome data identify metabolites that control transcription factors in E. coli . By switching an E. coli culture between starvation and growth, we induce strong metabolite concentration changes and gene expression changes. Using Network Component Analysis we calculate the activities of 209 transcriptional regulators and correlate them with metabolites. This approach captures, for instance, the in vivo kinetics of CRP regulation by cyclic-AMP. By testing correlations between all pairs of transcription factors and metabolites, we predict putative effectors of 71 transcription factors, and validate five interactions in vitro. These results show that combining transcriptomics and metabolomics generates hypotheses about metabolism-transcription interactions that drive transitions between physiological states.
Quorum sensing is a cell-to-cell signalling mechanism in which bacteria secrete hormone-like compounds called autoinducers. When these auto-inducers reach a certain threshold concentration, they interact with bacterial transcriptional regulators, thereby regulating gene expression. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) O157:H7 as well as E. coli K-12 produces the autoinducer-2 (AI-2), which is synthesized by the product of the luxS gene, and previous work from our laboratory has shown that genes encoding the EHEC type III secretion system were activated by quorum sensing. Recently, by hybridizing an E. coli K-12 gene array with cDNA synthesized from RNA extracted from EHEC strain 86-24 and its isogenic luxS mutant, we observed that other potential virulence-associated factors, such as genes encoding the expression and assembly of flagella, motility and chemotaxis, were also activated by quorum sensing. The array data also indicated that several genes encoding putative E. coli regulators were controlled by quorum sensing. In this report, we describe a two-component system regulated by quorum sensing that shares homology with Salmonella typhimurium PmrAB, which we have named quorum sensing E. coli regulator B and C (QseBC). The qseBC genes, previously identified only as open reading frames b3025 and b3026, are organized in an operon in the E. coli chromosome, with qseB encoding the response regulator and qseC the sensor kinase. We confirmed the regulation of qseBC by quorum sensing using qseB::lacZ transcriptional fusions and characterized the phenotypes of an isogenic qseC mutation in EHEC. This mutant expressed less flagellin and had reduced motility compared with the wild-type and complemented strains. Transcription of flhD, fliA, motA and fliC::lacZ fusions was decreased in the qseC mutant, suggesting that qseBC is a transcriptional regulator of flagella genes. A qseC mutant was also generated in E. coli K-12 strain MC1000 that showed the same phenotypes as the EHEC mutant, indicating that qseBC regulates flagella and motility by quorum sensing in both EHEC and K-12. QseBC activates transcription of flhDC, which is the master regulator for the flagella and motility genes and, in the absence of flhD, QseBC failed to activate the transcription of fliA. Motility of a luxS, but not of a qseC, mutant can be restored by providing AI-2 exogenously as preconditioned media, suggesting that the qseC mutant is unable to respond to AI-2. However, QseC has no effect on the expression of other quorum sensing-controlled genes such as those encoding for the type III secretion system. These data indicate that QseBC is one component of the quorum-sensing regulatory cascade in both EHEC and K-12 that is involved in the regulation of flagella and motility genes, but that additional regulators in this cascade remain to be characterized.
sigma E, an RNA polymerase sigma factor of apparent M(r) 28,000, was previously identified by its ability to direct transcription from the P2 promoter of the agarose gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal sequence of purified sigma E, was used to isolate the sigma E gene (sigE). The predicted sequence of sigma E shows greatest similarity to sequences of seven other proteins: Myxococcus xanthus CarQ, Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU, Pseudomonas syringae HrpL, Escherichia coli sigma E, Alcaligenes eutrophus CnrH, E. coli FecI, and Bacillus subtilis SigX, a protein of unknown function. These eight proteins define a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors sufficiently different from other sigma s that, in many cases, they are not identified by standard similarity searching methods. Available information suggests that all of them regulate extracytoplasmic functions and that they function as effector molecules responding to extracytoplasmic stimuli. A. eutrophus CnrH appears to be a plasmid-encoded factor.
Cell-free protein synthesis is becoming a powerful technique to construct and to study complex informational processes in vitro. Engineering synthetic gene circuits in a test tube, however, is seriously limited by the transcription repertoire of modern cell-free systems, composed of only a few bacteriophage regulatory elements. Here, we report the construction and the phenomenological characterization of synthetic gene circuits engineered with a cell-free expression toolbox that works with the seven E. coli sigma factors. The E. coli endogenous holoenzyme E70 is used as the primary transcription machinery. Elementary circuit motifs, such as multiple stage cascades, AND gate and negative feedback loops are constructed with the six other sigma factors, two bacteriophage RNA polymerases, and a set of repressors. The circuit dynamics reveal the importance of the global mRNA turnover rate and of passive competition-induced transcriptional regulation. Cell-free reactions can be carried out over long periods of time with a small-scale dialysis reactor or in phospholipid vesicles, an artificial cell system. This toolbox is a unique platform to study complex transcription/translation-based biochemical systems in vitro.
It has long been known that cell-cell adhesiveness is generally reduced in human cancers. Tumor cells are dissociated throughout the entire tumor masses of diffuse-type cancers, whereas those of solid tumors with high metastatic potentials are often focally dissociated or dedifferentiated at the invading fronts. Thus, both irreversible and reversible mechanisms for inactivating the cell adhesion system appear to exist. This paper focuses on the cadherin system, which mediates Ca2+-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion. The E (epithelial)-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in cancer cells is inactivated by multiple mechanisms corresponding to the pathological features described above. Mutations have been found in the genes for E-cadherin and its undercoat proteins, alpha- and beta-catenins, which connect cadherins to actin filaments and establish firm cell-cell adhesion. Transcriptional inactivation of E-cadherin expression was shown to occur frequently in tumor progression. E-cadherin expression in human cancer cells is regulated by CpG methylation around the promoter region. The cadherin system interacts directly with products of oncogenes, eg, cerbB-2 protein and the epidermal growth factor receptor, and of the tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, through beta-catenin, which may be important in signal transduction pathways contributing to the determination of the biological properties of human cancers. In conclusion, inactivation of the E-cadherin system by multiple mechanisms, including both genetic and epigenetic events, plays a significant role in multistage carcinogenesis.
Focus Review22 May 2012free access The many faces and functions of β-catenin Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Author Information Tomas Valenta1, George Hausmann1 and Konrad Basler 1 1Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland *Corresponding author. Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zurich 8057, Switzerland. Tel.:+41 44 635 3111; Fax:+41 44 635 6864; E-mail: [email protected] The EMBO Journal (2012)31:2714-2736https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.150 PDFDownload PDF of article text and main figures. ToolsAdd to favoritesDownload CitationsTrack CitationsPermissions ShareFacebookTwitterLinked InMendeleyWechatReddit Figures & Info β-Catenin (Armadillo in Drosophila) is a multitasking and evolutionary conserved molecule that in metazoans exerts a crucial role in a multitude of developmental and homeostatic processes. More specifically, β-catenin is an integral structural component of cadherin-based adherens junctions, and the key nuclear effector of canonical Wnt signalling in the nucleus. Imbalance in the structural and signalling properties of β-catenin often results in disease and deregulated growth connected to cancer and metastasis. Intense research into the life of β-catenin has revealed a complex picture. Here, we try to capture the state of the art: we try to summarize and make some sense of the processes that regulate β-catenin, as well as the plethora of β-catenin binding partners. One focus will be the interaction of β-catenin with different transcription factors and the potential implications of these interactions for direct cross-talk between β-catenin and non-Wnt signalling pathways. Introduction Wnt signalling represents one of a few key molecular cascades that regulate cell fate in animals throughout their lifespan. Already during embryonic development Wnt-regulated β-catenin critically contributes to the establishment of the body axis and the orchestration of tissue and organ development. In adult organs, Wnt signalling continues to play indispensable roles in tissue homeostasis, cell renewal, and regeneration. Interaction of Wnt ligands with their receptor complexes triggers several intracellular signalling cascades; these are, traditionally, separated into two types according to the role played by β-catenin. In the canonical Wnt cascade, β-catenin is the key effector responsible for transduction of the signal to the nucleus and it triggers transcription of Wnt-specific genes responsible for the control of cell fate decisions in many cells and tissues. The second type of Wnt signalling is independent of β-catenin signalling function and comprises, among others, the Wnt/PCP (Planar Cell Polarity) and Wnt-dependent/protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathways (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). We will focus here on β-catenin-dependent signalling and refer the interested reader to the following excellent reviews on the other types of Wnt signalling (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). But β-catenin is not just a component of the Wnt signal cascade (Figure 1). In the late 1980s, β-catenin was independently discovered twice, on the basis of its different functions: structural and signalling. The group of Rolf Kemler isolated β-catenin, together with two other molecules (α-catenin and γ-catenin/plakoglobin), as proteins associated with E-cadherin, the key molecule of Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion. These proteins were named catenins (in Latin catena means chain) to reflect their linking of E-cadherin to cytoskeletal structures (Ozawa et al, 1989). The signalling potential of β-catenin was exposed through its Drosophila orthologue Armadillo: the armadillo gene was discovered in the seminal screens for mutations affecting segmentation of the Drosophila embryo, performed by Eric Wieschaus, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, and Gerd Jürgens (Wieschaus et al, 1984). Whereas the wild-type embryonic cuticle contains segments with alternating rows of denticles and naked belts, segments in armadillo mutants form only a lawn of denticles, the naked belts are missing. Such phenotypes resemble wingless null mutants (Wieschaus and Riggleman, 1987). Further analysis of Armadillo performed by the laboratories of Eric Wieschaus, Mark Peifer, and others revealed the conservation of its structural function in adherens junctions (McCrea et al, 1990; Peifer and Wieschaus, 1990; Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). Epistatic analysis determined that the armadillo segmentation function is regulated by Wingless (Riggleman et al, 1990). This finding was a key step in the subsequent characterization of the Wnt/β-catenin (or Wingless/Armadillo, respectively) signalling cascade, and of the functions and mutual interactions of its individual components. Another important part of this mosaic was revealed by the description of the basic pathway leading from the Wingless ligand through Dishevelled to regulation of Armadillo stability by Shaggy/Zeste-white-3 (GSK3 in vertebrates) (Siegfried et al, 1994). Finally in the mid-1990's several groups independently found that the signalling function of β-catenin/Armadillo in the nucleus is mediated via T-cell factor (TCF)/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors, which in association with β-catenin trigger Wnt-mediated transcription (Behrens et al, 1996; Huber et al, 1996; Molenaar et al, 1996; Brunner et al, 1997; van de Wetering et al, 1997). The generation of conditional β-catenin mouse mutants (either knockout or constitutively active) has revealed that a vast array of developmental processes is regulated by the multitasking β-catenin in mammalian embryonic and adult tissues (reviewed in detail by Grigoryan et al, 2008). Figure 1.The life of β-catenin within the cell. Newly synthesized β-catenin is immobilized by E-cadherin at adherens junctions, where it can interact also with α-catenin, thereby indirectly modulating the actin cytoskeleton. β-catenin can be released from the adherens junctions by the activity of protein kinases or by downregulation of E-cadherin. Free excess β-catenin is immediately phosphorylated by the destruction complex and thus marked for subsequent degradation. A portion of β-catenin can be kept in the cytoplasm protected by APC. Wnt signalling blocks the activity of the destruction complex resulting in increased levels of cytolasmic β-catenin, which is translocated to the nucleus. In the nucleus, β-catenin associates with transcription factors from the TCF/Lef family and drives transcription of Wnt/β-catenin target genes. Other factors can also provide β-catenin with a DNA binding platform, often counteracting canonical Wnt signalling. Signalling activity of β-catenin in the nucleus can be regulated by modulating its nuclear import/export. Besides its structural role in the adherens junctions and signalling activity in the nucleus, β-catenin may also play an important function in the centrosome. CTTA, C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators, NTTA, N-Terminal Transcriptional Activators. Download figure Download PowerPoint The many roles of β-catenin beg the question as to how an evolutionarily conserved pathway can control so many varied processes during animal development and tissue homeostasis via one central molecule? Further, how is the final transcriptional output of β-catenin determined and modulated? Part of the explanation might be found in the plethora of β-catenin binding partners that either affect its transcriptional output or permit its direct cross-talk with other transcription factors and signalling pathways. In this review, we will discuss the following aspects: how is the β-catenin protein regulated, how might different transcriptional co-activators of β-catenin lead to diverse outcomes, how can β-catenin affect the activity of various transcription factors, and finally, what are the potential implications of a direct cross-talk between β-catenin and other signalling pathways? The structure of β-catenin determines its role as a scaffold molecule The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is one of a small set of conserved signalling cascades (together with Notch, Hedgehog, TGFβ/BMP, Hippo, and receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated pathways) that regulate animal development from Cnidarians to mammals. β-Catenin's orchestration of developmental processes is the sum of its dual roles—signalling and structural—as elegantly illustrated by the work of Lyashenko et al (2011): mouse Emryonic Stem Cells (mESC) lacking β-catenin lose their ability to differentiate into a mesodermal germ layer and do not form any neuroepithelium; both defects are connected to defective cell–cell junctions arising during the differentiation processes. Putting back a signalling-defective β-catenin restores the integrity of adherens junction and importantly also the ability of mESC to form neuroepithelial structures and endoderm. However the mesoderm formation is not rescued and thus requires also intact β-catenin transcription (Lyashenko et al, 2011). Similarly in the developing dorsal neural tube and the migrating population of neural crest cells the loss of β-catenin results in more drastic phenotypes than only blocking the β-catenin signalling outputs, further showing that the two roles of β-catenin cause an additive effect (Valenta et al, 2011). Such overlap and possible separation of β-catenin roles was also demonstrated in a seminal analysis in Drosophila more than a decade ago (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). How can the β-catenin protein mediate both distinct adhesive and signalling activities? The answer is in the structural composition of β-catenin. The β-catenin protein (781 aa residues in humans) consists of a central region (residues 141–664) made up of 12 imperfect Armadillo repeats (R1–12) that are flanked by distinct N- and C-terminal domains, NTD and CTD, respectively. A specific conserved helix (Helix-C) is located proximally to the CTD, adjacent to the last ARM repeat (residues 667–683) (Xing et al, 2008; Figure 2). The NTD and the CTD may be structurally flexible, whereas the central region forms a relatively rigid scaffold. This scaffold serves as an interaction platform for many β-catenin binding partners, at the membrane, in cytosol, and in the nucleus (Huber et al, 1997). Figure 2.β-Catenin serves as a binding platform for a multitude of interaction partners in adherens junctions, in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. (A) The β-catenin protein consists of a central region composed of 12 Armadillo repeats (numbered boxes), flanked by an amino-terminal domain (NTD) and a carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). Between the last Armadillo repeat and the flexible part of the CTD is the conserved helix-C (C). Coloured bars show experimentally validated binding sites for β-catenin interaction partners. Colour code: purple, components of adherens junctions; blue, members of the β-catenin destruction complex; red, transcriptional co-activators; green, transcription factors providing DNA binding; gray, transcriptional inhibitors. C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators (CTTA), the critical domain for their binding is marked by brackets. Little circles indicate phosphorylation sites on either E-cadherin or APC that enhance the interactions. APC, Adenoma Polyposis Coli; TCF/Lef, T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer factor; AR, Androgen Receptor; LRH-1, Liver Receptor Homologue-1; ICAT, Inhibitor of β-catenin and TCF; BCL9, B-cell lymphoma-9. (B) The C-terminus of β-catenin serves as a binding factor for a multitude of complexes promoting β-catenin-mediated transcription. Experimentally validated binding motifs for particular proteins are indicated. In the grey boxes, the function is indicated of the particular β-catenin interactor or of a complex, where this binding partner is a member. Brg-1 is also known as SMARCA4, CBP as CREBBP. HAT, histone acetyl-transferase; HMT, histone methyl-transferase; MLL, mixed lineage leukaemia; PAF-1, Polymerase-associated factor-1; PIC, Pre-Initiation Complex; TBP, TATA-box Binding Protein; TRRAP, Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein. Download figure Download PowerPoint β-Catenin is a founding member of the Armadillo (ARM) repeat protein superfamily. Each ARM repeat of its central region comprises ∼42 residues, forming three helices arranged in triangular shape. Together, all ARM repeats form a superhelix that features a long, positively charged groove. Biochemical and crystal structure analyses revealed that many of β-catenin's binding partners share overlapping binding sites in the groove of the central β-catenin region: consequently, these partners cannot bind to β-catenin simultaneously. This mutual exclusivity is certainly valid for the key β-catenin interacting molecules: E-cadherin (the main partner in adherens junctions), APC (the main partner in the destruction complex), and TCF/Lef (the main partner in the nucleus). All these β-catenin interactors bind to the core binding site comprising ARM repeats R3–R9, where they form salt bridges with two key amino-acid residues, Lys312 and Lys435. Other ARM repeats are also involved, at least in strengthening the interaction (Graham et al, 2000; Eklof Spink et al, 2001; Huber and Weis, 2001; Poy et al, 2001). The spatial segregation of the different β-catenin binding partners within the cell may be important for enabling the function of these proteins. However, the competition among them for β-catenin is also important for regulating canonical Wnt signalling. Conformational changes of β-catenin may also help regulate its binding properties: the terminal regions of β-catenin (NTD and especially CTD) have been proposed to fold back on the central region affecting, for example, the binding of TCF/Lef (Castaño et al, 2002; Solanas et al, 2004). Biochemical evidence supports the model that β-catenin-mediated transcription is performed by a monomeric, back-folded form of β-catenin, whereas a cadherin-binding dimeric form is associated with α-catenin in adherens junctions (Gottardi and Gumbiner, 2004). Interestingly, Helix-C within the most N-terminal part of the CTD was shown to be essential for the signalling activity of β-catenin, while being completely dispensable for its role in cell–cell adhesion (Xing et al, 2008). This is not surprising, as a plethora of β-catenin transcriptional co-activators require an intact Helix-C (or region R12-Helix-C) for their proper binding (Figure 2; Mosimann et al, 2009). The crucial role of this part of β-catenin was predicted and experimentally demonstrated more than a decade ago by elegant in-vivo analyses of different mutants of Armadillo (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). In these studies, mutants of Armadillo (point mutations or deletions) were produced, some interfered with the adhesion function, but not with its role in Wnt signalling, and vice versa: revealing that the two functions of Arm are separable. Some of these mutations specifically hit Helix-C and abrogated the signalling role but perfectly preserved the structural function of Armadillo. Recently, the ability to completely block the signalling output of Armadillo, without affecting its adhesive role, was confirmed and experimentally extended to β-catenin in mice (Valenta et al, 2011). Interestingly, the functional separation of the two roles occurred evolutionarily in Caenorhabdidis elegans. This nematode has at least three specialized β-catenins: the adhesion-specific HMP-2 that binds cadherins but not TCFs, and two signalling ones, BAR-1 and WRM-1, that can bind TCFs and regulate transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Yet another C. elegans protein, SYS-1, has adopted a signalling role, although it is not related to β-catenin on the sequence level. SYS-1 structurally mimics β-catenin (the positively charged groove), interacts with TCFs, and even mediates transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Such examples of functional separation, however, appear to be the exception. In the majority of animal species (including the model organisms Drosophila, Xenopus, and mouse), a single β-catenin carries out the two functions. These functions may be carried out by different protein pools and are orchestrated by mechanisms (e.g., post-translational modifications), which control the spatial separation, retention, or stability of β-catenin. That said, in vertebrates γ-catenin (plakoglobin), a close relative of β-catenin, may in certain cases compensate for the loss of β-catenin's structural function; in contrast, the signalling role of β-catenin in vivo seems not to be compensated (Huelsken et al, 2000; Grigoryan et al, 2008). The role of plakoglobin in Wnt/β-catenin signalling warrants further clarification. β-Catenin is an evolutionarily conserved protein The usually single β-catenin gene represents the highly conserved centre piece within the complex expanded Wnt signalling pathway (Figure 3). The Wnt pathway features a multitude of paralogous components, especially at the level of Wnt ligands and their receptors. The complexity at the level of the Wnt ligands and receptors (Frizzled proteins) seems to have arisen early in metazoan evolution. In Cnidarians, 14 Wnt genes have been identified which belong to 12 of the 13 known different Wnt subfamilies, 11 of which are also present in vertebrates, where some additional duplication events within individual subfamilies lead to expression of up to 19 different Wnts in mammals (Kusserow et al, 2005). In sponges (Porifera), which constitute some of the most basal metazoans, the Wnt ligand complexity is not as high, only three (respectively two) Wnt ligands are known (Lapébie et al, 2009; Adamska et al, 2010). Figure 3.β-Catenin is an evolutionarily ancient molecule that provided its function before Wnt signalling and classical cadherin-based adhesion appeared. Schematic evolutionary tree showing the relationships among Amoebozoa (represented by Dictyostelium discoideum) and metazoa, as well as the diversity of signalling components. In Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin acts as a functional molecule in polarized epithelia. In animals (metazoa), β-catenin plays a dual role as a signalling component of canonical Wnt signalling or as a structural component of cadherin-based cell–cell junctions. The presence of β-catenin and key components of adherens junctions (classical cadherins—containing an intracellular domain binding to β-catenin) and of canonical Wnt signalling (Wnt ligands, TCF/Lef transcription factors) is indicated to the right. In the case of Wnt ligands, the first number indicates how many different Wnt ligands were determined, the second number in brackets indicates how many Wnt subfamilies were determined in a particular group. The number in the case of TCF/Lef refers to how many different TCF/Lef proteins were found. Yes means presence, no absence. The following animal species were compared: Porifera (Sponges): Amphimedon queenslandica, Cnidaria: Nematostella vectans, Insects: Drosophila melanogaster; Vertebrates: Mus musculus. Download figure Download PowerPoint In sponges, ctenophores, and cnidarians, one gene encodes a β-catenin protein with striking sequence similarity to mammalian β-catenin. Cnidarian β-catenin (e.g., of the polyp Hydra) exhibits >60% of amino-acid identity with mammalian β-catenin, with the main differences being found in the most C-terminal part, which is generally less conserved (Xing et al, 2008; Zhao et al, 2011). The structural identity of the repeat domain of β-catenin is nearly 80%. Moreover, locus conservation among sponges (Amphimedon sp.), cnidarians (sea anemone Nematostella vectans) and later developed metazoans (Deuterostomia; vertebrates belong to this group) includes even the exon/intron features of the β-catenin gene (Holland et al, 2005; Adamska et al, 2010). Highlighting the pivotal role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling also in early metazoans are findings that changes in β-catenin levels dramatically impact their development. In sponges (Porifera), the activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling by blocking β-catenin degradation leads to the formation of ectopic ostia (canal openings), which can disrupt feeding (Lapébie et al, 2009). In Hydra (Cnidaria), ectopic stabilization of β-catenin results in multiple head and tentacle formation along the body, while the opposite phenotype, a loss of head structures, results from depletion of β-catenin (Broun et al, 2005; Müller et al, 2007; Gee et al, 2010). Such observations suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signalling represents a primeval component, driving metazoan body plan and axis formation since the beginning of animal evolution. The critical role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling for establishing the primary body axis (Petersen and Reddien, 2009), or more precisely A/P (anterior/posterior) identity, has been long studied in diverse organisms. It is a re-occuring theme and reveals itself either in individual (para)segments, as in the Drosophila embryo, or of whole developing body plans, such as in vertebrates (Sanson, 2001; Niehrs, 2010). A paradigmatic example showing the indispensable role of β-catenin in the process of axial patterning came from experiments in the amphibian Xenopus laevis: ectopic expression of β-catenin in ventral blastomeres of Xenopus embryos induces axis duplication (i.e., the formation of a secondary axis), a phenotype reminiscent of misexpression of several Wnt ligands (Guger and Gumbiner, 1995). Depletion of β-catenin results in the opposite effect, ventralization of the embryo with a shortened A/P axis (Haesman et al, 1994). A/P axis identity and mesoderm formation is controlled by β-catenin-mediated transcription also in mammals, since mouse embryos lacking β-catenin do not develop a proper A/P axis and fail to form mesoderm, resulting in corrupted gastrulation (Haegel et al, 1995; Huelsken et al, 2000). Interestingly, a homologue of β-catenin was found also in the non-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum (slime mould) (Coates et al, 2002). This contrasts with the lack of Wnt ligands, and indeed of most proteins involved in Wnt signalling, which so far have been identified solely in metazoans but not in any other phyla (Figure 3). In normal circumstances, Dictyostelium discoideum is a unicellular organism; but in response to starvation single cells start to aggregate and form fruiting bodies, which comprise a rigid stalk and on its tip a collection of spores. During the formation of a fruiting body the aggregated cells establish a polarized epithelium that is essential for the subsequent multicellular phase of development. Even though Dictyostelium discoideum, in contrast to metazoans, lacks classical cadherins, the β-catenin orthologue Aardvark is an essential structural molecule in the polarized epithelia. Moreover, to maintain the proper epithelial structure Aardvark cooperates with α-catenin, another key structural molecule known from metazoans. Ddα-catenin is upregulated during the transition to multicellularity and colocalizes with Aardvark and F-actin at the sites of cell–cell contact. Loss or knockdown of either Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin or Ddα-catenin significantly compromises epithelial morphology, polarity, and formation of fruiting bodies (Dickinson et al, 2011). Thus, β-catenin, together with α-catenin and most likely actin, can promote primitive cell–cell contacts even without cadherins. These observations suggest that the principles underlying metazoan multicellularity may be more ancient than previously thought and that the structural role of β-catenin precedes its signalling role in the canonical Wnt pathway—β-catenin and α-catenin were engaged in the formation of polarized epithelia before classical catenins came on the scene in metazoans. However, even in Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin is not exclusively a structural molecule. In response to cAMP, a series of events leads to phosphorylation of GSK3, an orthologue of GSKA that phosphorylates Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin. This phosphorylation event activates Aardvark and leads to gene transcription via a so far unknown mechanism, as there are no TCF/Lef transcription factors in Dictyostelium discoideum (Grimson et al, 2000). Even though the mechanism seems different from the core Wnt/β-catenin pathway (phosphorylation leads to activation, not to degradation), at least the interaction between β-catenin and GSK3 is present and may have further evolved into the mode of action typical for canonical Wnt signalling. Canonical signalling in a nutshell Without a Wnt signal, the levels of cytoplasmic free β-catenin are kept low (Figure 1). If not bound to E-cadherin, β-catenin is phosphorylated in the cytoplasm by the activity of a multiprotein destruction complex, marking β-catenin for degradation. This complex consists of the scaffold proteins Axin and Adenoma Polyposis Coli (APC), and of the kinases phosphorylating β-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), casein kinase 1 (CK1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) (Kimelman and Xu, 2006). The binding of Wnt ligands to the Frizzled transmembrane receptors and LRP5/6 co-receptors (Low density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein) starts a series of molecular events leading to inhibition of the β-catenin destruction complex. Ligand activated Frizzled receptors recruit the cytoplasmic protein Dishevelled (Dvl) to the receptor complex through direct binding; Dvl subsequently multimerizes and induces formation of so-called LRP-associated Wnt signalosomes (Bilic et al, 2007). Dvl in turn recruits the rate-limiting component Axin (most likely together with associated kinases, such as GSK3) and thus destabilizes the β-catenin destruction complex (Schwarz-Romond et al, 2007). Dvl-mediated phosporylation of LRP5/6 by CK1 is key for proper functioning of the Wnt signalosome as it leads to a block of GSK3 kinase activity (Zeng et al, 2008). Unphosphorylated β-catenin escapes degradation, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and translocates to the nucleus. Nuclear β-catenin associates with DNA-binding transcription factors of the TCF/Lef family. TCF/Lef proteins possess only limited ability to activate transcription. In the absence of Wnt signals, TCF/Lef factors act as transcriptional repressors. The binding of β-catenin converts TCF/Lef proteins into bipartite TCF/β-catenin transcriptional activators, converting the Wnt signal into the transcription of specific target genes (Najdi et al, 2011; Archbold et al, 2012). Albeit elegant, recent work has made clear that such a simplified, linear scheme describing the translation of the Wnt signal via β-catenin into a cell-specific genetic program does not capture the full complexity of β-catenin-mediated functions within Wnt receiving cells. β-Catenin at the membrane: balancing adhesion and signalling The majority of β-catenin is located at the cytoplasmic side of the membrane as a component of cadherin-based cell–cell connections in the absence of a Wnt stimulus. Cadherin-based adherens junctions contribute to forming polarized epithelial tissues, a characteristic metazoan feature necessary for maintaining organismal integrity (Meng and Takeichi, 2009). Cadherins are single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins that engage in Ca2+-dependent homotypic interactions via their extracellular regions and that also link to β-catenin through their cytoplasmic tails. Classical cadherins were named for the tissue in which they were most prominently expressed: for example, epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) in epithelial cells; neural cadherin (N-cadherin) in the nervous system. Many cell types co-express several cadherins (Meng and Takeichi, 2009; Stepniak et al, 2009). β-Catenin can interact with the cytoplasmic domain of all of them, but most studied are the functional consequences of the β-catenin–E-cadherin interaction. The cadherin–β-catenin interaction is constitutive and may occur even in single isolated cells in an adhesion-independent way (Stepniak et al, 2009). Newly synthesized E-cadherin associates with β-catenin while still in the endoplasmic reticulum and the two proteins move together to the cell membrane. Interfering with the binding of β-catenin to E-cadherin results in proteasomal degradation of the cadherin, because β-catenin shields a PEST sequence motif on E-cadherin, which, if free, is recognized by a ubiquitin ligase that marks E-cadherin for degradation (Hinc et al, 1994). Reciprocally, E-cadherin association stabilizes β-catenin by preventing binding of components of the β-catenin destruction complex (namely APC and Axin) (Huber and Weis, 2001). At cadherin-based cell–cell junctions, β-catenin can bind α-catenin with distal parts of the NTD and the adjacent first ARM repeat of β-catenin close to a hinge region around Arg151 (Figure 2; Pokutta and Weis 2000; Xing et al, 2008). In close proximity, C-terminal to this hinge, is the binding site for BCL9, an important transcriptional co-activator of β-catenin (Hoffm
In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the production of many virulence factors and secondary metabolites is regulated in concert with cell density through quorum sensing. Two quorum-sensing regulons have been identified in which the LuxR homologues LasR and RhlR are activated by N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (OdDHL) and N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (BHL) respectively. The lasR and rhlR genes are linked to the luxl homologues lasl and rhll, which are responsible for synthesis of OdDHL and BHL, respectively. As lasRl and rhlRl are both involved in regulating synthesis of exoenzymes such as elastase, we sought to determine the nature of their interrelationship. By using lacZ transcriptional fusions in both homologous (P. aeruginosa) and heterologous (Escherichia coli) genetic backgrounds we provide evidence that (i) lasR is expressed constitutively throughout the growth cycle, (ii) rhlR expression is regulated by LasR/OdDHL, and (iii) that RhlR/BHL regulates rhll. We also show that expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor gene rpoS is abolished in a P. aeruginosa lasR mutant and in the pleiotropic BHL-negative mutant PANO67. Furthermore, our data reveal that kin E. coli, an rpoS-lacZ fusion is regulated directly by RhlR/BHL. Taken together, these results indicate that P. aeruginosa employs a multilayered hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade involving RhlR/BHL and LasR/OdDHL, interlinked via RpoS, to integrate the regulation of virulence determinants and secondary metabolites with adaptation and survival in the stationary phase.
The small nucleotides pppGpp and ppGpp (or (p)ppGpp) are rapidly synthesized in response to nutritional stress. In Escherichia coli, the enzymes RelA and SpoT are triggered by different starvation signals to produce (p)ppGpp. In many Gram-positive bacteria this is carried out by RelA and two small homologs. (p)ppGpp, along with the transcription factor DksA, has profound effects on transcription initiation in E. coli. (p)ppGpp/DksA exert differential effects on promoters by playing upon their intrinsic kinetic parameters, and by facilitating the utilization of alternative sigma factors. (p)ppGpp also regulates replication and translation. These studies highlight (p)ppGpp as a key factor in bacterial physiology that responds rapidly to diverse stresses, by shutting down growth and priming cellular defensive and adaptive processes.
Bacteria often cope with environmental stress by inducing alternative sigma (sigma) factors, which direct RNA polymerase to specific promoters, thereby inducing a set of genes called a regulon to combat the stress. To understand the conserved and organism-specific functions of each sigma, it is necessary to be able to predict their promoters, so that their regulons can be followed across species. However, the variability of promoter sequences and motif spacing makes their prediction difficult. We developed and validated an accurate promoter prediction model for Escherichia coli sigmaE, which enabled us to predict a total of 89 unique sigmaE-controlled transcription units in E. coli K-12 and eight related genomes. SigmaE controls the envelope stress response in E. coli K-12. The portion of the regulon conserved across genomes is functionally coherent, ensuring the synthesis, assembly, and homeostasis of lipopolysaccharide and outer membrane porins, the key constituents of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The larger variable portion is predicted to perform pathogenesis-associated functions, suggesting that sigmaE provides organism-specific functions necessary for optimal host interaction. The success of our promoter prediction model for sigmaE suggests that it will be applicable for the prediction of promoter elements for many alternative sigma factors.
The yeast heat shock transcription factor gene, HSF1, has been isolated from an S. cerevisiae genomic expression library (in lambda gt11). The sequenced gene encodes an 833 amino acid protein having a mass of 93,218 daltons. Expression of specific DNA-binding activity in E. coli and of transcriptional activity in yeast confirmed the identity of the cloned gene. Southern analysis and gene-disruption experiments indicate that the heat shock transcription factor is encoded by a single-copy, essential gene. The DNA-binding domain was localized to a 118 amino acid region in the amino-terminal third of the protein. Inspection of the DNA-binding domain reveals no resemblance to any currently known secondary structural motifs implicated in DNA recognition and binding.
Upon exposure to oxygen, Escherichia coli increases the expression of enzymes essential for aerobic respiration, such as components of the TCA cycle and terminal oxidase complexes. This increase requires the elimination of repression mediated by the Arc regulatory system under anaerobic conditions. Coordinately, the synthesis of enzymes that function in anaerobic processes such as fermentation decreases, partly due to the inactivation of the transcription factor Fnr. E. coli is thus able to adjust the levels of respiratory enzymes to fit its environmental circumstances, and in this case, reduces the production of the less energy efficient fermentation enzymes in favor of the aerobic pathways. In contrast to the advantage in energy production, aerobiosis brings a disadvantage to E. coli: the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e.superoxide anion radical (O2·- hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (·OH). These byproducts of aerobic respiration damage many biological molecules, including DNA, proteins, and lipids. To alleviate the toxicity of these compounds, E. coli induces the synthesis of protective enzymes, such as Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (SodA) and catalase I (HP I), and this induction is controlled by the regulatory proteins SoxRS, OxyR, and ArcAB. Thus, ArcAB, Fnr, SoxRS, and OxyR function in concert so that E. coli can optimize its energy production and growth rate. Fnr and SoxRS are cytoplasmic, DNA-binding proteins, and these regulatory systems utilize iron-sulfur clusters as cofactors which may directly sense the redox environment. OxyR is also a cytoplasmic, DNA-binding protein, and appears to respond to redox potential through the oxidation state of a specific cysteine residue. In the ArcAB system (which belongs to the family of two-component regulatory systems), ArcB, a membrane protein, functions as the sensor, and ArcA, a DNA-binding protein, directly controls target gene expression. Under anaerobic conditions, ArcB undergoes autophosphorylation and transphosphorylates ArcA, stimulating ArcA's DNA-binding activity. During aerobic growth, the transphosphorylation of ArcA does not occur. In this signal transduction mechanism, the ArcB C-terminal or “receiver” domain plays a critical role; that is, it stimulates or abolishes the transphosphorylation depending on the metabolic state of the cell, which in turn is influenced by the availability of oxygen. E. coli thus employs at least four global regulatory systems which monitor the cellular oxidative/metabolic conditions, and adjust the expression of more than 70 operons to give the organism a better aerobic life.
Machine learning approaches offer the potential to systematically identify transcriptional regulatory interactions from a compendium of microarray expression profiles. However, experimental validation of the performance of these methods at the genome scale has remained elusive. Here we assess the global performance of four existing classes of inference algorithms using 445 Escherichia coli Affymetrix arrays and 3,216 known E. coli regulatory interactions from RegulonDB. We also developed and applied the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm, a novel extension of the relevance networks class of algorithms. CLR demonstrates an average precision gain of 36% relative to the next-best performing algorithm. At a 60% true positive rate, CLR identifies 1,079 regulatory interactions, of which 338 were in the previously known network and 741 were novel predictions. We tested the predicted interactions for three transcription factors with chromatin immunoprecipitation, confirming 21 novel interactions and verifying our RegulonDB-based performance estimates. CLR also identified a regulatory link providing central metabolic control of iron transport, which we confirmed with real-time quantitative PCR. The compendium of expression data compiled in this study, coupled with RegulonDB, provides a valuable model system for further improvement of network inference algorithms using experimental data.
In nucleotide excision repair DNA damage is removed through incision of the damaged strand on both sides of the lesion, followed by repair synthesis, which fills the gap using the intact strand as a template, and finally ligation. In prokaryotes the damaged base is removed in a 12-13 nucleotide (nt)-long oligomer; in eukaryotes including humans the damage is excised in a 24-32 nt-long fragment. Excision in Escherichia coli is accomplished by three proteins designated UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC. In humans, by contrast, 16 polypeptides including seven xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) proteins, the trimric replication protein A [RPA, human single-stranded DNA binding protein (HSSB)], and the multisubunit (7-10) general transcription factor TFIIH are required for the dual incisions. Transcribed strands are specifically targeted for excision repair by a transcription-repair coupling factor both in E. coli and in humans. In humans, excision repair is an important defense mechanism against the two major carcinogens, sunlight and cigarette smoke. Individuals defective in excision repair exhibit a high incidence of cancer while individuals with a defect in coupling transcription to repair suffer from neurological and skeletal abnormalities.
Transcription factor Sp1 is a protein present in mammalian cells that binds to GC box promoter elements and selectively activates mRNA synthesis from genes that contain functional recognition sites. We have isolated a cDNA that encodes the 696 C-terminal amino acid residues of human Sp1. By expression of truncated fragments of Sp1 in E. coli, we have localized the DNA binding activity to the C-terminal 168 amino acid residues. In this region, Sp1 has three contiguous Zn(II) finger motifs, which are believed to be metalloprotein structures that interact with DNA. We have found that purified Sp1 requires Zn(II) for sequence-specific binding to DNA. Thus, it is likely that Sp1 interacts with DNA by binding of the Zn(II) fingers. To facilitate the identification of mutant variants of Sp1 that are defective in DNA binding, we have also devised a bacterial colony assay for detection of Sp1 binding to DNA.
We have used an S1 mapping assay to demonstrate that the mRNA transcripts of the Escherichia coli galactose operon found in intact E. coli cells with a defect in adenylate cyclase or the cyclic AMP receptor protein contain at their 5' end about five nucleotides more than the gal mRNA molecules made in wild type cells. The same difference between gal RNA synthesized in vitro in the absence of cyclic AMP or cyclic AMP receptor protein and gal RNA made in the presence of these factors is detected by this assay. Our results strongly suggest that the same two overlapping promoters, which we previously identified by in vitro transcription of gal DNA fragments, also control the expression of the galactose operon in intact cells. The intracellular levels of cyclic AMP determine which promoter is utilized.
An improved method is described for the renaturation of microgram amounts of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. The protein band is visualized in the gel by KCl staining, the band cut out and crushed, and the protein eluted by diffusion in a buffer containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Protein is concentrated and sodium dodecyl sulfate is removed by acetone precipitation of the sample. Renaturation of the protein occurs after the precipitate is dissolved in 6 m guanidine hydrochloride and then diluted. The activity of the sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase can be recovered with 98–100% efficiency after electrophoresis in an SDS-gel and renaturation by this technique. To assess whether the method is generally applicable we tested some or all of the steps involved in the procedure using E. coli transcription termination factor rho, β-galactosidase, alkaline phosphatase, wheat α-amylase, and DNA topoisomerase. We show how the method can be used to determine the approximate molecular weight of the DNA topoisomerase polypeptide by sectioning a gel on which a partially pure sample has been fractionated by electrophoresis.
Much of the information available about factors that affect mRNA decay in Escherichia coli, and by inference in other bacteria, has been gleaned from study of less than 25 of the approximately 4,300 predicted E. coli messages. To investigate these factors more broadly, we examined the half-lives and steady-state abundance of known and predicted E. coli mRNAs at single-gene resolution by using two-color fluorescent DNA microarrays. An rRNA-based strategy for normalization of microarray data was developed to permit quantitation of mRNA decay after transcriptional arrest by rifampicin. We found that globally, mRNA half-lives were similar in nutrient-rich media and defined media in which the generation time was approximately tripled. A wide range of stabilities was observed for individual mRNAs of E. coli, although approximately 80% of all mRNAs had half-lives between 3 and 8 min. Genes having biologically related metabolic functions were commonly observed to have similar stabilities. Whereas the half-lives of a limited number of mRNAs correlated positively with their abundance, we found that overall, increased mRNA stability is not predictive of increased abundance. Neither the density of putative sites of cleavage by RNase E, which is believed to initiate mRNA decay in E. coli, nor the free energy of folding of 5' or 3' untranslated region sequences was predictive of mRNA half-life. Our results identify previously unsuspected features of mRNA decay at a global level and also indicate that generalizations about decay derived from the study of individual gene transcripts may have limited applicability.
The PurR transcription factor plays a critical role in transcriptional regulation of purine metabolism in enterobacteria. Here, we elucidate the role of PurR under exogenous adenine stimulation at the genome-scale using high-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)–chip and gene expression data obtained under in vivo conditions. Analysis of microarray data revealed that adenine stimulation led to changes in transcript level of about 10% of Escherichia coli genes, including the purine biosynthesis pathway. The E. coli strain lacking the purR gene showed that a total of 56 genes are affected by the deletion. From the ChIP–chip analysis, we determined that over 73% of genes directly regulated by PurR were enriched in the biosynthesis, utilization and transport of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, and 20% of them were functionally unknown. Compared to the functional diversity of the regulon of the other general transcription factors in E. coli, the functions and size of the PurR regulon are limited.
▪ Abstract Proteolysis in Escherichia coli serves to rid the cell of abnormal and misfolded proteins and to limit the time and amounts of availability of critical regulatory proteins. Most intracellular proteolysis is initiated by energy-dependent proteases, including Lon, ClpXP, and HflB; HflB is the only essential E. coli protease. The ATPase domains of these proteases mediate substrate recognition. Recognition elements in target are not well defined, but are probably not specific amino acid sequences. Naturally unstable protein substrates include the regulatory sigma factors for heat shock and stationary phase gene expression, σ32 and RpoS. Other cellular proteins serve as environmental sensors that modulate the availability of the unstable proteins to the proteases, resulting in rapid changes in sigma factor levels and therefore in gene transcription. Many of the specific proteases found in E. coli are well-conserved in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and serve critical functions in developmental systems.
We track the motion of individual fluorescently labeled mRNA molecules inside live E. coli cells. We find that the motion is subdiffusive, with an exponent that is robust to physiological changes, including the disruption of cytoskeletal elements. By modifying the parameters of the RNA molecule and the bacterial cell, we are able to examine the possible mechanisms that can lead to this unique type of motion, especially the effect of macromolecular crowding. We also examine the implications of anomalous diffusion on the kinetics of bacterial gene regulation, in particular, how transcription factors find their DNA targets.
Quantitative views of cellular functions require precise measures of rates of biomolecule production, especially proteins-the direct effectors of biological processes. Here, we present a genome-wide approach, based on ribosome profiling, for measuring absolute protein synthesis rates. The resultant E. coli data set transforms our understanding of the extent to which protein synthesis is precisely controlled to optimize function and efficiency. Members of multiprotein complexes are made in precise proportion to their stoichiometry, whereas components of functional modules are produced differentially according to their hierarchical role. Estimates of absolute protein abundance also reveal principles for optimizing design. These include how the level of different types of transcription factors is optimized for rapid response and how a metabolic pathway (methionine biosynthesis) balances production cost with activity requirements. Our studies reveal how general principles, important both for understanding natural systems and for synthesizing new ones, emerge from quantitative analyses of protein synthesis.
▪ Abstract The promoter recognition specificity of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase is modulated by replacement of the σ subunit in the first step and by interaction with transcription factors in the second step. The overall differentiated state of ∼2000 molecules of the RNA polymerase in a single cell can be estimated after measurement of both the intracellular concentrations and the RNA polymerase-binding affinities for all seven species of the σ subunit and 100–150 transcription factors. The anticipated impact from this line of systematic approach is that the prediction of the expression hierarchy of ∼4000 genes on the E. coli genome can be estimated.
ABSTRACT The genome DNA of Escherichia coli is associated with about 10 DNA-binding structural proteins, altogether forming the nucleoid. The nucleoid proteins play some functional roles, besides their structural roles, in the global regulation of such essential DNA functions as replication, recombination, and transcription. Using a quantitative Western blot method, we have performed for the first time a systematic determination of the intracellular concentrations of 12 species of the nucleoid protein in E. coli W3110, including CbpA (curved DNA-binding protein A), CbpB (curved DNA-binding protein B, also known as Rob [right origin binding protein]), DnaA (DNA-binding protein A), Dps (DNA-binding protein from starved cells), Fis (factor for inversion stimulation), Hfq (host factor for phage Q β ), H-NS (histone-like nucleoid structuring protein), HU (heat-unstable nucleoid protein), IciA (inhibitor of chromosome initiation A), IHF (integration host factor), Lrp (leucine-responsive regulatory protein), and StpA (suppressor of td mutant phenotype A). Intracellular protein levels reach a maximum at the growing phase for nine proteins, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Fis, Hfq, H-NS, HU, IciA, Lrp, and StpA, which may play regulatory roles in DNA replication and/or transcription of the growth-related genes. In descending order, the level of accumulation, calculated in monomers, in growing E. coli cells is Fis, Hfq, HU, StpA, H-NS, IHF*, CbpB (Rob), Dps*, Lrp, DnaA, IciA, and CbpA* (stars represent the stationary-phase proteins). The order of abundance, in descending order, in the early stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, HU, Hfq, H-NS, StpA, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, CbpA, and Fis, while that in the late stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, Hfq, HU, CbpA*, StpA, H-NS, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, and Fis. Thus, the major protein components of the nucleoid change from Fis and HU in the growing phase to Dps in the stationary phase. The curved DNA-binding protein, CbpA, appears only in the late stationary phase. These changes in the composition of nucleoid-associated proteins in the stationary phase are accompanied by compaction of the genome DNA and silencing of the genome functions.
The htpR gene of E. coli encodes a positive regulator of the heat-shock response. We have fused the htpR gene to the inducible PL promoter of phage lambda. Overproduction of HtpR following a temperature upshift resulted in the overexpression of heat-shock proteins. We describe the purification and initial in vitro characterization of the factor controlling expression of heat-shock genes. The factor was the 32 kd htpR gene product. In vitro, a mixture of HtpR and core RNA polymerase initiated transcription at heat-shock promoters. The sigma factor encoded by rpoD was not required for this reaction. Therefore, HtpR is a sigma factor that promotes transcription initiation at heat-shock promoters. We propose that htpR be renamed rpoH and that the gene product be called sigma-32.
ABSTRACT The genome-wide location of RNA polymerase binding sites was determined in Escherichia coli using chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays (chIP-chip). Cross-linked chromatin was isolated in triplicate from rifampin-treated cells, and DNA bound to RNA polymerase was precipitated with an antibody specific for the β′ subunit. The DNA was amplified and hybridized to “tiled” oligonucleotide microarrays representing the whole genome at 25-bp resolution. A total of 1,139 binding sites were detected and evaluated by comparison to gene expression data from identical conditions and to 961 promoters previously identified by established methods. Of the detected binding sites, 418 were located within 1,000 bp of a known promoter, leaving 721 previously unknown RNA polymerase binding sites. Within 200 bp, we were able to detect 51% (189/368) of the known σ70-specific promoters occurring upstream of an expressed open reading frame and 74% (273/368) within 1,000 bp. Conversely, many known promoters were not detected by chIP-chip, leading to an estimated 26% negative-detection rate. Most of the detected binding sites could be associated with expressed transcription units, but 299 binding sites occurred near inactive transcription units. This map of RNA polymerase binding sites represents a foundation for studies of transcription factors in E. coli and an important evaluation of the chIP-chip technique.
Abstract Metabolism controls gene expression through allosteric interactions between metabolites and transcription factors. These interactions are usually measured with in vitro assays, but there are no methods to identify them at a genome-scale in vivo. Here we show that dynamic transcriptome and metabolome data identify metabolites that control transcription factors in E. coli . By switching an E. coli culture between starvation and growth, we induce strong metabolite concentration changes and gene expression changes. Using Network Component Analysis we calculate the activities of 209 transcriptional regulators and correlate them with metabolites. This approach captures, for instance, the in vivo kinetics of CRP regulation by cyclic-AMP. By testing correlations between all pairs of transcription factors and metabolites, we predict putative effectors of 71 transcription factors, and validate five interactions in vitro. These results show that combining transcriptomics and metabolomics generates hypotheses about metabolism-transcription interactions that drive transitions between physiological states.
Quorum sensing is a cell-to-cell signalling mechanism in which bacteria secrete hormone-like compounds called autoinducers. When these auto-inducers reach a certain threshold concentration, they interact with bacterial transcriptional regulators, thereby regulating gene expression. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) O157:H7 as well as E. coli K-12 produces the autoinducer-2 (AI-2), which is synthesized by the product of the luxS gene, and previous work from our laboratory has shown that genes encoding the EHEC type III secretion system were activated by quorum sensing. Recently, by hybridizing an E. coli K-12 gene array with cDNA synthesized from RNA extracted from EHEC strain 86-24 and its isogenic luxS mutant, we observed that other potential virulence-associated factors, such as genes encoding the expression and assembly of flagella, motility and chemotaxis, were also activated by quorum sensing. The array data also indicated that several genes encoding putative E. coli regulators were controlled by quorum sensing. In this report, we describe a two-component system regulated by quorum sensing that shares homology with Salmonella typhimurium PmrAB, which we have named quorum sensing E. coli regulator B and C (QseBC). The qseBC genes, previously identified only as open reading frames b3025 and b3026, are organized in an operon in the E. coli chromosome, with qseB encoding the response regulator and qseC the sensor kinase. We confirmed the regulation of qseBC by quorum sensing using qseB::lacZ transcriptional fusions and characterized the phenotypes of an isogenic qseC mutation in EHEC. This mutant expressed less flagellin and had reduced motility compared with the wild-type and complemented strains. Transcription of flhD, fliA, motA and fliC::lacZ fusions was decreased in the qseC mutant, suggesting that qseBC is a transcriptional regulator of flagella genes. A qseC mutant was also generated in E. coli K-12 strain MC1000 that showed the same phenotypes as the EHEC mutant, indicating that qseBC regulates flagella and motility by quorum sensing in both EHEC and K-12. QseBC activates transcription of flhDC, which is the master regulator for the flagella and motility genes and, in the absence of flhD, QseBC failed to activate the transcription of fliA. Motility of a luxS, but not of a qseC, mutant can be restored by providing AI-2 exogenously as preconditioned media, suggesting that the qseC mutant is unable to respond to AI-2. However, QseC has no effect on the expression of other quorum sensing-controlled genes such as those encoding for the type III secretion system. These data indicate that QseBC is one component of the quorum-sensing regulatory cascade in both EHEC and K-12 that is involved in the regulation of flagella and motility genes, but that additional regulators in this cascade remain to be characterized.
sigma E, an RNA polymerase sigma factor of apparent M(r) 28,000, was previously identified by its ability to direct transcription from the P2 promoter of the agarose gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal sequence of purified sigma E, was used to isolate the sigma E gene (sigE). The predicted sequence of sigma E shows greatest similarity to sequences of seven other proteins: Myxococcus xanthus CarQ, Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU, Pseudomonas syringae HrpL, Escherichia coli sigma E, Alcaligenes eutrophus CnrH, E. coli FecI, and Bacillus subtilis SigX, a protein of unknown function. These eight proteins define a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors sufficiently different from other sigma s that, in many cases, they are not identified by standard similarity searching methods. Available information suggests that all of them regulate extracytoplasmic functions and that they function as effector molecules responding to extracytoplasmic stimuli. A. eutrophus CnrH appears to be a plasmid-encoded factor.
Cell-free protein synthesis is becoming a powerful technique to construct and to study complex informational processes in vitro. Engineering synthetic gene circuits in a test tube, however, is seriously limited by the transcription repertoire of modern cell-free systems, composed of only a few bacteriophage regulatory elements. Here, we report the construction and the phenomenological characterization of synthetic gene circuits engineered with a cell-free expression toolbox that works with the seven E. coli sigma factors. The E. coli endogenous holoenzyme E70 is used as the primary transcription machinery. Elementary circuit motifs, such as multiple stage cascades, AND gate and negative feedback loops are constructed with the six other sigma factors, two bacteriophage RNA polymerases, and a set of repressors. The circuit dynamics reveal the importance of the global mRNA turnover rate and of passive competition-induced transcriptional regulation. Cell-free reactions can be carried out over long periods of time with a small-scale dialysis reactor or in phospholipid vesicles, an artificial cell system. This toolbox is a unique platform to study complex transcription/translation-based biochemical systems in vitro.
It has long been known that cell-cell adhesiveness is generally reduced in human cancers. Tumor cells are dissociated throughout the entire tumor masses of diffuse-type cancers, whereas those of solid tumors with high metastatic potentials are often focally dissociated or dedifferentiated at the invading fronts. Thus, both irreversible and reversible mechanisms for inactivating the cell adhesion system appear to exist. This paper focuses on the cadherin system, which mediates Ca2+-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion. The E (epithelial)-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in cancer cells is inactivated by multiple mechanisms corresponding to the pathological features described above. Mutations have been found in the genes for E-cadherin and its undercoat proteins, alpha- and beta-catenins, which connect cadherins to actin filaments and establish firm cell-cell adhesion. Transcriptional inactivation of E-cadherin expression was shown to occur frequently in tumor progression. E-cadherin expression in human cancer cells is regulated by CpG methylation around the promoter region. The cadherin system interacts directly with products of oncogenes, eg, cerbB-2 protein and the epidermal growth factor receptor, and of the tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, through beta-catenin, which may be important in signal transduction pathways contributing to the determination of the biological properties of human cancers. In conclusion, inactivation of the E-cadherin system by multiple mechanisms, including both genetic and epigenetic events, plays a significant role in multistage carcinogenesis.
Focus Review22 May 2012free access The many faces and functions of β-catenin Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Author Information Tomas Valenta1, George Hausmann1 and Konrad Basler 1 1Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland *Corresponding author. Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zurich 8057, Switzerland. Tel.:+41 44 635 3111; Fax:+41 44 635 6864; E-mail: [email protected] The EMBO Journal (2012)31:2714-2736https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.150 PDFDownload PDF of article text and main figures. ToolsAdd to favoritesDownload CitationsTrack CitationsPermissions ShareFacebookTwitterLinked InMendeleyWechatReddit Figures & Info β-Catenin (Armadillo in Drosophila) is a multitasking and evolutionary conserved molecule that in metazoans exerts a crucial role in a multitude of developmental and homeostatic processes. More specifically, β-catenin is an integral structural component of cadherin-based adherens junctions, and the key nuclear effector of canonical Wnt signalling in the nucleus. Imbalance in the structural and signalling properties of β-catenin often results in disease and deregulated growth connected to cancer and metastasis. Intense research into the life of β-catenin has revealed a complex picture. Here, we try to capture the state of the art: we try to summarize and make some sense of the processes that regulate β-catenin, as well as the plethora of β-catenin binding partners. One focus will be the interaction of β-catenin with different transcription factors and the potential implications of these interactions for direct cross-talk between β-catenin and non-Wnt signalling pathways. Introduction Wnt signalling represents one of a few key molecular cascades that regulate cell fate in animals throughout their lifespan. Already during embryonic development Wnt-regulated β-catenin critically contributes to the establishment of the body axis and the orchestration of tissue and organ development. In adult organs, Wnt signalling continues to play indispensable roles in tissue homeostasis, cell renewal, and regeneration. Interaction of Wnt ligands with their receptor complexes triggers several intracellular signalling cascades; these are, traditionally, separated into two types according to the role played by β-catenin. In the canonical Wnt cascade, β-catenin is the key effector responsible for transduction of the signal to the nucleus and it triggers transcription of Wnt-specific genes responsible for the control of cell fate decisions in many cells and tissues. The second type of Wnt signalling is independent of β-catenin signalling function and comprises, among others, the Wnt/PCP (Planar Cell Polarity) and Wnt-dependent/protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathways (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). We will focus here on β-catenin-dependent signalling and refer the interested reader to the following excellent reviews on the other types of Wnt signalling (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). But β-catenin is not just a component of the Wnt signal cascade (Figure 1). In the late 1980s, β-catenin was independently discovered twice, on the basis of its different functions: structural and signalling. The group of Rolf Kemler isolated β-catenin, together with two other molecules (α-catenin and γ-catenin/plakoglobin), as proteins associated with E-cadherin, the key molecule of Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion. These proteins were named catenins (in Latin catena means chain) to reflect their linking of E-cadherin to cytoskeletal structures (Ozawa et al, 1989). The signalling potential of β-catenin was exposed through its Drosophila orthologue Armadillo: the armadillo gene was discovered in the seminal screens for mutations affecting segmentation of the Drosophila embryo, performed by Eric Wieschaus, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, and Gerd Jürgens (Wieschaus et al, 1984). Whereas the wild-type embryonic cuticle contains segments with alternating rows of denticles and naked belts, segments in armadillo mutants form only a lawn of denticles, the naked belts are missing. Such phenotypes resemble wingless null mutants (Wieschaus and Riggleman, 1987). Further analysis of Armadillo performed by the laboratories of Eric Wieschaus, Mark Peifer, and others revealed the conservation of its structural function in adherens junctions (McCrea et al, 1990; Peifer and Wieschaus, 1990; Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). Epistatic analysis determined that the armadillo segmentation function is regulated by Wingless (Riggleman et al, 1990). This finding was a key step in the subsequent characterization of the Wnt/β-catenin (or Wingless/Armadillo, respectively) signalling cascade, and of the functions and mutual interactions of its individual components. Another important part of this mosaic was revealed by the description of the basic pathway leading from the Wingless ligand through Dishevelled to regulation of Armadillo stability by Shaggy/Zeste-white-3 (GSK3 in vertebrates) (Siegfried et al, 1994). Finally in the mid-1990's several groups independently found that the signalling function of β-catenin/Armadillo in the nucleus is mediated via T-cell factor (TCF)/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors, which in association with β-catenin trigger Wnt-mediated transcription (Behrens et al, 1996; Huber et al, 1996; Molenaar et al, 1996; Brunner et al, 1997; van de Wetering et al, 1997). The generation of conditional β-catenin mouse mutants (either knockout or constitutively active) has revealed that a vast array of developmental processes is regulated by the multitasking β-catenin in mammalian embryonic and adult tissues (reviewed in detail by Grigoryan et al, 2008). Figure 1.The life of β-catenin within the cell. Newly synthesized β-catenin is immobilized by E-cadherin at adherens junctions, where it can interact also with α-catenin, thereby indirectly modulating the actin cytoskeleton. β-catenin can be released from the adherens junctions by the activity of protein kinases or by downregulation of E-cadherin. Free excess β-catenin is immediately phosphorylated by the destruction complex and thus marked for subsequent degradation. A portion of β-catenin can be kept in the cytoplasm protected by APC. Wnt signalling blocks the activity of the destruction complex resulting in increased levels of cytolasmic β-catenin, which is translocated to the nucleus. In the nucleus, β-catenin associates with transcription factors from the TCF/Lef family and drives transcription of Wnt/β-catenin target genes. Other factors can also provide β-catenin with a DNA binding platform, often counteracting canonical Wnt signalling. Signalling activity of β-catenin in the nucleus can be regulated by modulating its nuclear import/export. Besides its structural role in the adherens junctions and signalling activity in the nucleus, β-catenin may also play an important function in the centrosome. CTTA, C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators, NTTA, N-Terminal Transcriptional Activators. Download figure Download PowerPoint The many roles of β-catenin beg the question as to how an evolutionarily conserved pathway can control so many varied processes during animal development and tissue homeostasis via one central molecule? Further, how is the final transcriptional output of β-catenin determined and modulated? Part of the explanation might be found in the plethora of β-catenin binding partners that either affect its transcriptional output or permit its direct cross-talk with other transcription factors and signalling pathways. In this review, we will discuss the following aspects: how is the β-catenin protein regulated, how might different transcriptional co-activators of β-catenin lead to diverse outcomes, how can β-catenin affect the activity of various transcription factors, and finally, what are the potential implications of a direct cross-talk between β-catenin and other signalling pathways? The structure of β-catenin determines its role as a scaffold molecule The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is one of a small set of conserved signalling cascades (together with Notch, Hedgehog, TGFβ/BMP, Hippo, and receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated pathways) that regulate animal development from Cnidarians to mammals. β-Catenin's orchestration of developmental processes is the sum of its dual roles—signalling and structural—as elegantly illustrated by the work of Lyashenko et al (2011): mouse Emryonic Stem Cells (mESC) lacking β-catenin lose their ability to differentiate into a mesodermal germ layer and do not form any neuroepithelium; both defects are connected to defective cell–cell junctions arising during the differentiation processes. Putting back a signalling-defective β-catenin restores the integrity of adherens junction and importantly also the ability of mESC to form neuroepithelial structures and endoderm. However the mesoderm formation is not rescued and thus requires also intact β-catenin transcription (Lyashenko et al, 2011). Similarly in the developing dorsal neural tube and the migrating population of neural crest cells the loss of β-catenin results in more drastic phenotypes than only blocking the β-catenin signalling outputs, further showing that the two roles of β-catenin cause an additive effect (Valenta et al, 2011). Such overlap and possible separation of β-catenin roles was also demonstrated in a seminal analysis in Drosophila more than a decade ago (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). How can the β-catenin protein mediate both distinct adhesive and signalling activities? The answer is in the structural composition of β-catenin. The β-catenin protein (781 aa residues in humans) consists of a central region (residues 141–664) made up of 12 imperfect Armadillo repeats (R1–12) that are flanked by distinct N- and C-terminal domains, NTD and CTD, respectively. A specific conserved helix (Helix-C) is located proximally to the CTD, adjacent to the last ARM repeat (residues 667–683) (Xing et al, 2008; Figure 2). The NTD and the CTD may be structurally flexible, whereas the central region forms a relatively rigid scaffold. This scaffold serves as an interaction platform for many β-catenin binding partners, at the membrane, in cytosol, and in the nucleus (Huber et al, 1997). Figure 2.β-Catenin serves as a binding platform for a multitude of interaction partners in adherens junctions, in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. (A) The β-catenin protein consists of a central region composed of 12 Armadillo repeats (numbered boxes), flanked by an amino-terminal domain (NTD) and a carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). Between the last Armadillo repeat and the flexible part of the CTD is the conserved helix-C (C). Coloured bars show experimentally validated binding sites for β-catenin interaction partners. Colour code: purple, components of adherens junctions; blue, members of the β-catenin destruction complex; red, transcriptional co-activators; green, transcription factors providing DNA binding; gray, transcriptional inhibitors. C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators (CTTA), the critical domain for their binding is marked by brackets. Little circles indicate phosphorylation sites on either E-cadherin or APC that enhance the interactions. APC, Adenoma Polyposis Coli; TCF/Lef, T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer factor; AR, Androgen Receptor; LRH-1, Liver Receptor Homologue-1; ICAT, Inhibitor of β-catenin and TCF; BCL9, B-cell lymphoma-9. (B) The C-terminus of β-catenin serves as a binding factor for a multitude of complexes promoting β-catenin-mediated transcription. Experimentally validated binding motifs for particular proteins are indicated. In the grey boxes, the function is indicated of the particular β-catenin interactor or of a complex, where this binding partner is a member. Brg-1 is also known as SMARCA4, CBP as CREBBP. HAT, histone acetyl-transferase; HMT, histone methyl-transferase; MLL, mixed lineage leukaemia; PAF-1, Polymerase-associated factor-1; PIC, Pre-Initiation Complex; TBP, TATA-box Binding Protein; TRRAP, Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein. Download figure Download PowerPoint β-Catenin is a founding member of the Armadillo (ARM) repeat protein superfamily. Each ARM repeat of its central region comprises ∼42 residues, forming three helices arranged in triangular shape. Together, all ARM repeats form a superhelix that features a long, positively charged groove. Biochemical and crystal structure analyses revealed that many of β-catenin's binding partners share overlapping binding sites in the groove of the central β-catenin region: consequently, these partners cannot bind to β-catenin simultaneously. This mutual exclusivity is certainly valid for the key β-catenin interacting molecules: E-cadherin (the main partner in adherens junctions), APC (the main partner in the destruction complex), and TCF/Lef (the main partner in the nucleus). All these β-catenin interactors bind to the core binding site comprising ARM repeats R3–R9, where they form salt bridges with two key amino-acid residues, Lys312 and Lys435. Other ARM repeats are also involved, at least in strengthening the interaction (Graham et al, 2000; Eklof Spink et al, 2001; Huber and Weis, 2001; Poy et al, 2001). The spatial segregation of the different β-catenin binding partners within the cell may be important for enabling the function of these proteins. However, the competition among them for β-catenin is also important for regulating canonical Wnt signalling. Conformational changes of β-catenin may also help regulate its binding properties: the terminal regions of β-catenin (NTD and especially CTD) have been proposed to fold back on the central region affecting, for example, the binding of TCF/Lef (Castaño et al, 2002; Solanas et al, 2004). Biochemical evidence supports the model that β-catenin-mediated transcription is performed by a monomeric, back-folded form of β-catenin, whereas a cadherin-binding dimeric form is associated with α-catenin in adherens junctions (Gottardi and Gumbiner, 2004). Interestingly, Helix-C within the most N-terminal part of the CTD was shown to be essential for the signalling activity of β-catenin, while being completely dispensable for its role in cell–cell adhesion (Xing et al, 2008). This is not surprising, as a plethora of β-catenin transcriptional co-activators require an intact Helix-C (or region R12-Helix-C) for their proper binding (Figure 2; Mosimann et al, 2009). The crucial role of this part of β-catenin was predicted and experimentally demonstrated more than a decade ago by elegant in-vivo analyses of different mutants of Armadillo (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). In these studies, mutants of Armadillo (point mutations or deletions) were produced, some interfered with the adhesion function, but not with its role in Wnt signalling, and vice versa: revealing that the two functions of Arm are separable. Some of these mutations specifically hit Helix-C and abrogated the signalling role but perfectly preserved the structural function of Armadillo. Recently, the ability to completely block the signalling output of Armadillo, without affecting its adhesive role, was confirmed and experimentally extended to β-catenin in mice (Valenta et al, 2011). Interestingly, the functional separation of the two roles occurred evolutionarily in Caenorhabdidis elegans. This nematode has at least three specialized β-catenins: the adhesion-specific HMP-2 that binds cadherins but not TCFs, and two signalling ones, BAR-1 and WRM-1, that can bind TCFs and regulate transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Yet another C. elegans protein, SYS-1, has adopted a signalling role, although it is not related to β-catenin on the sequence level. SYS-1 structurally mimics β-catenin (the positively charged groove), interacts with TCFs, and even mediates transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Such examples of functional separation, however, appear to be the exception. In the majority of animal species (including the model organisms Drosophila, Xenopus, and mouse), a single β-catenin carries out the two functions. These functions may be carried out by different protein pools and are orchestrated by mechanisms (e.g., post-translational modifications), which control the spatial separation, retention, or stability of β-catenin. That said, in vertebrates γ-catenin (plakoglobin), a close relative of β-catenin, may in certain cases compensate for the loss of β-catenin's structural function; in contrast, the signalling role of β-catenin in vivo seems not to be compensated (Huelsken et al, 2000; Grigoryan et al, 2008). The role of plakoglobin in Wnt/β-catenin signalling warrants further clarification. β-Catenin is an evolutionarily conserved protein The usually single β-catenin gene represents the highly conserved centre piece within the complex expanded Wnt signalling pathway (Figure 3). The Wnt pathway features a multitude of paralogous components, especially at the level of Wnt ligands and their receptors. The complexity at the level of the Wnt ligands and receptors (Frizzled proteins) seems to have arisen early in metazoan evolution. In Cnidarians, 14 Wnt genes have been identified which belong to 12 of the 13 known different Wnt subfamilies, 11 of which are also present in vertebrates, where some additional duplication events within individual subfamilies lead to expression of up to 19 different Wnts in mammals (Kusserow et al, 2005). In sponges (Porifera), which constitute some of the most basal metazoans, the Wnt ligand complexity is not as high, only three (respectively two) Wnt ligands are known (Lapébie et al, 2009; Adamska et al, 2010). Figure 3.β-Catenin is an evolutionarily ancient molecule that provided its function before Wnt signalling and classical cadherin-based adhesion appeared. Schematic evolutionary tree showing the relationships among Amoebozoa (represented by Dictyostelium discoideum) and metazoa, as well as the diversity of signalling components. In Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin acts as a functional molecule in polarized epithelia. In animals (metazoa), β-catenin plays a dual role as a signalling component of canonical Wnt signalling or as a structural component of cadherin-based cell–cell junctions. The presence of β-catenin and key components of adherens junctions (classical cadherins—containing an intracellular domain binding to β-catenin) and of canonical Wnt signalling (Wnt ligands, TCF/Lef transcription factors) is indicated to the right. In the case of Wnt ligands, the first number indicates how many different Wnt ligands were determined, the second number in brackets indicates how many Wnt subfamilies were determined in a particular group. The number in the case of TCF/Lef refers to how many different TCF/Lef proteins were found. Yes means presence, no absence. The following animal species were compared: Porifera (Sponges): Amphimedon queenslandica, Cnidaria: Nematostella vectans, Insects: Drosophila melanogaster; Vertebrates: Mus musculus. Download figure Download PowerPoint In sponges, ctenophores, and cnidarians, one gene encodes a β-catenin protein with striking sequence similarity to mammalian β-catenin. Cnidarian β-catenin (e.g., of the polyp Hydra) exhibits >60% of amino-acid identity with mammalian β-catenin, with the main differences being found in the most C-terminal part, which is generally less conserved (Xing et al, 2008; Zhao et al, 2011). The structural identity of the repeat domain of β-catenin is nearly 80%. Moreover, locus conservation among sponges (Amphimedon sp.), cnidarians (sea anemone Nematostella vectans) and later developed metazoans (Deuterostomia; vertebrates belong to this group) includes even the exon/intron features of the β-catenin gene (Holland et al, 2005; Adamska et al, 2010). Highlighting the pivotal role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling also in early metazoans are findings that changes in β-catenin levels dramatically impact their development. In sponges (Porifera), the activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling by blocking β-catenin degradation leads to the formation of ectopic ostia (canal openings), which can disrupt feeding (Lapébie et al, 2009). In Hydra (Cnidaria), ectopic stabilization of β-catenin results in multiple head and tentacle formation along the body, while the opposite phenotype, a loss of head structures, results from depletion of β-catenin (Broun et al, 2005; Müller et al, 2007; Gee et al, 2010). Such observations suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signalling represents a primeval component, driving metazoan body plan and axis formation since the beginning of animal evolution. The critical role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling for establishing the primary body axis (Petersen and Reddien, 2009), or more precisely A/P (anterior/posterior) identity, has been long studied in diverse organisms. It is a re-occuring theme and reveals itself either in individual (para)segments, as in the Drosophila embryo, or of whole developing body plans, such as in vertebrates (Sanson, 2001; Niehrs, 2010). A paradigmatic example showing the indispensable role of β-catenin in the process of axial patterning came from experiments in the amphibian Xenopus laevis: ectopic expression of β-catenin in ventral blastomeres of Xenopus embryos induces axis duplication (i.e., the formation of a secondary axis), a phenotype reminiscent of misexpression of several Wnt ligands (Guger and Gumbiner, 1995). Depletion of β-catenin results in the opposite effect, ventralization of the embryo with a shortened A/P axis (Haesman et al, 1994). A/P axis identity and mesoderm formation is controlled by β-catenin-mediated transcription also in mammals, since mouse embryos lacking β-catenin do not develop a proper A/P axis and fail to form mesoderm, resulting in corrupted gastrulation (Haegel et al, 1995; Huelsken et al, 2000). Interestingly, a homologue of β-catenin was found also in the non-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum (slime mould) (Coates et al, 2002). This contrasts with the lack of Wnt ligands, and indeed of most proteins involved in Wnt signalling, which so far have been identified solely in metazoans but not in any other phyla (Figure 3). In normal circumstances, Dictyostelium discoideum is a unicellular organism; but in response to starvation single cells start to aggregate and form fruiting bodies, which comprise a rigid stalk and on its tip a collection of spores. During the formation of a fruiting body the aggregated cells establish a polarized epithelium that is essential for the subsequent multicellular phase of development. Even though Dictyostelium discoideum, in contrast to metazoans, lacks classical cadherins, the β-catenin orthologue Aardvark is an essential structural molecule in the polarized epithelia. Moreover, to maintain the proper epithelial structure Aardvark cooperates with α-catenin, another key structural molecule known from metazoans. Ddα-catenin is upregulated during the transition to multicellularity and colocalizes with Aardvark and F-actin at the sites of cell–cell contact. Loss or knockdown of either Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin or Ddα-catenin significantly compromises epithelial morphology, polarity, and formation of fruiting bodies (Dickinson et al, 2011). Thus, β-catenin, together with α-catenin and most likely actin, can promote primitive cell–cell contacts even without cadherins. These observations suggest that the principles underlying metazoan multicellularity may be more ancient than previously thought and that the structural role of β-catenin precedes its signalling role in the canonical Wnt pathway—β-catenin and α-catenin were engaged in the formation of polarized epithelia before classical catenins came on the scene in metazoans. However, even in Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin is not exclusively a structural molecule. In response to cAMP, a series of events leads to phosphorylation of GSK3, an orthologue of GSKA that phosphorylates Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin. This phosphorylation event activates Aardvark and leads to gene transcription via a so far unknown mechanism, as there are no TCF/Lef transcription factors in Dictyostelium discoideum (Grimson et al, 2000). Even though the mechanism seems different from the core Wnt/β-catenin pathway (phosphorylation leads to activation, not to degradation), at least the interaction between β-catenin and GSK3 is present and may have further evolved into the mode of action typical for canonical Wnt signalling. Canonical signalling in a nutshell Without a Wnt signal, the levels of cytoplasmic free β-catenin are kept low (Figure 1). If not bound to E-cadherin, β-catenin is phosphorylated in the cytoplasm by the activity of a multiprotein destruction complex, marking β-catenin for degradation. This complex consists of the scaffold proteins Axin and Adenoma Polyposis Coli (APC), and of the kinases phosphorylating β-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), casein kinase 1 (CK1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) (Kimelman and Xu, 2006). The binding of Wnt ligands to the Frizzled transmembrane receptors and LRP5/6 co-receptors (Low density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein) starts a series of molecular events leading to inhibition of the β-catenin destruction complex. Ligand activated Frizzled receptors recruit the cytoplasmic protein Dishevelled (Dvl) to the receptor complex through direct binding; Dvl subsequently multimerizes and induces formation of so-called LRP-associated Wnt signalosomes (Bilic et al, 2007). Dvl in turn recruits the rate-limiting component Axin (most likely together with associated kinases, such as GSK3) and thus destabilizes the β-catenin destruction complex (Schwarz-Romond et al, 2007). Dvl-mediated phosporylation of LRP5/6 by CK1 is key for proper functioning of the Wnt signalosome as it leads to a block of GSK3 kinase activity (Zeng et al, 2008). Unphosphorylated β-catenin escapes degradation, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and translocates to the nucleus. Nuclear β-catenin associates with DNA-binding transcription factors of the TCF/Lef family. TCF/Lef proteins possess only limited ability to activate transcription. In the absence of Wnt signals, TCF/Lef factors act as transcriptional repressors. The binding of β-catenin converts TCF/Lef proteins into bipartite TCF/β-catenin transcriptional activators, converting the Wnt signal into the transcription of specific target genes (Najdi et al, 2011; Archbold et al, 2012). Albeit elegant, recent work has made clear that such a simplified, linear scheme describing the translation of the Wnt signal via β-catenin into a cell-specific genetic program does not capture the full complexity of β-catenin-mediated functions within Wnt receiving cells. β-Catenin at the membrane: balancing adhesion and signalling The majority of β-catenin is located at the cytoplasmic side of the membrane as a component of cadherin-based cell–cell connections in the absence of a Wnt stimulus. Cadherin-based adherens junctions contribute to forming polarized epithelial tissues, a characteristic metazoan feature necessary for maintaining organismal integrity (Meng and Takeichi, 2009). Cadherins are single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins that engage in Ca2+-dependent homotypic interactions via their extracellular regions and that also link to β-catenin through their cytoplasmic tails. Classical cadherins were named for the tissue in which they were most prominently expressed: for example, epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) in epithelial cells; neural cadherin (N-cadherin) in the nervous system. Many cell types co-express several cadherins (Meng and Takeichi, 2009; Stepniak et al, 2009). β-Catenin can interact with the cytoplasmic domain of all of them, but most studied are the functional consequences of the β-catenin–E-cadherin interaction. The cadherin–β-catenin interaction is constitutive and may occur even in single isolated cells in an adhesion-independent way (Stepniak et al, 2009). Newly synthesized E-cadherin associates with β-catenin while still in the endoplasmic reticulum and the two proteins move together to the cell membrane. Interfering with the binding of β-catenin to E-cadherin results in proteasomal degradation of the cadherin, because β-catenin shields a PEST sequence motif on E-cadherin, which, if free, is recognized by a ubiquitin ligase that marks E-cadherin for degradation (Hinc et al, 1994). Reciprocally, E-cadherin association stabilizes β-catenin by preventing binding of components of the β-catenin destruction complex (namely APC and Axin) (Huber and Weis, 2001). At cadherin-based cell–cell junctions, β-catenin can bind α-catenin with distal parts of the NTD and the adjacent first ARM repeat of β-catenin close to a hinge region around Arg151 (Figure 2; Pokutta and Weis 2000; Xing et al, 2008). In close proximity, C-terminal to this hinge, is the binding site for BCL9, an important transcriptional co-activator of β-catenin (Hoffm
In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the production of many virulence factors and secondary metabolites is regulated in concert with cell density through quorum sensing. Two quorum-sensing regulons have been identified in which the LuxR homologues LasR and RhlR are activated by N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (OdDHL) and N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (BHL) respectively. The lasR and rhlR genes are linked to the luxl homologues lasl and rhll, which are responsible for synthesis of OdDHL and BHL, respectively. As lasRl and rhlRl are both involved in regulating synthesis of exoenzymes such as elastase, we sought to determine the nature of their interrelationship. By using lacZ transcriptional fusions in both homologous (P. aeruginosa) and heterologous (Escherichia coli) genetic backgrounds we provide evidence that (i) lasR is expressed constitutively throughout the growth cycle, (ii) rhlR expression is regulated by LasR/OdDHL, and (iii) that RhlR/BHL regulates rhll. We also show that expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor gene rpoS is abolished in a P. aeruginosa lasR mutant and in the pleiotropic BHL-negative mutant PANO67. Furthermore, our data reveal that kin E. coli, an rpoS-lacZ fusion is regulated directly by RhlR/BHL. Taken together, these results indicate that P. aeruginosa employs a multilayered hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade involving RhlR/BHL and LasR/OdDHL, interlinked via RpoS, to integrate the regulation of virulence determinants and secondary metabolites with adaptation and survival in the stationary phase.
The small nucleotides pppGpp and ppGpp (or (p)ppGpp) are rapidly synthesized in response to nutritional stress. In Escherichia coli, the enzymes RelA and SpoT are triggered by different starvation signals to produce (p)ppGpp. In many Gram-positive bacteria this is carried out by RelA and two small homologs. (p)ppGpp, along with the transcription factor DksA, has profound effects on transcription initiation in E. coli. (p)ppGpp/DksA exert differential effects on promoters by playing upon their intrinsic kinetic parameters, and by facilitating the utilization of alternative sigma factors. (p)ppGpp also regulates replication and translation. These studies highlight (p)ppGpp as a key factor in bacterial physiology that responds rapidly to diverse stresses, by shutting down growth and priming cellular defensive and adaptive processes.
Bacteria often cope with environmental stress by inducing alternative sigma (sigma) factors, which direct RNA polymerase to specific promoters, thereby inducing a set of genes called a regulon to combat the stress. To understand the conserved and organism-specific functions of each sigma, it is necessary to be able to predict their promoters, so that their regulons can be followed across species. However, the variability of promoter sequences and motif spacing makes their prediction difficult. We developed and validated an accurate promoter prediction model for Escherichia coli sigmaE, which enabled us to predict a total of 89 unique sigmaE-controlled transcription units in E. coli K-12 and eight related genomes. SigmaE controls the envelope stress response in E. coli K-12. The portion of the regulon conserved across genomes is functionally coherent, ensuring the synthesis, assembly, and homeostasis of lipopolysaccharide and outer membrane porins, the key constituents of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The larger variable portion is predicted to perform pathogenesis-associated functions, suggesting that sigmaE provides organism-specific functions necessary for optimal host interaction. The success of our promoter prediction model for sigmaE suggests that it will be applicable for the prediction of promoter elements for many alternative sigma factors.
The yeast heat shock transcription factor gene, HSF1, has been isolated from an S. cerevisiae genomic expression library (in lambda gt11). The sequenced gene encodes an 833 amino acid protein having a mass of 93,218 daltons. Expression of specific DNA-binding activity in E. coli and of transcriptional activity in yeast confirmed the identity of the cloned gene. Southern analysis and gene-disruption experiments indicate that the heat shock transcription factor is encoded by a single-copy, essential gene. The DNA-binding domain was localized to a 118 amino acid region in the amino-terminal third of the protein. Inspection of the DNA-binding domain reveals no resemblance to any currently known secondary structural motifs implicated in DNA recognition and binding.
Upon exposure to oxygen, Escherichia coli increases the expression of enzymes essential for aerobic respiration, such as components of the TCA cycle and terminal oxidase complexes. This increase requires the elimination of repression mediated by the Arc regulatory system under anaerobic conditions. Coordinately, the synthesis of enzymes that function in anaerobic processes such as fermentation decreases, partly due to the inactivation of the transcription factor Fnr. E. coli is thus able to adjust the levels of respiratory enzymes to fit its environmental circumstances, and in this case, reduces the production of the less energy efficient fermentation enzymes in favor of the aerobic pathways. In contrast to the advantage in energy production, aerobiosis brings a disadvantage to E. coli: the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e.superoxide anion radical (O2·- hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (·OH). These byproducts of aerobic respiration damage many biological molecules, including DNA, proteins, and lipids. To alleviate the toxicity of these compounds, E. coli induces the synthesis of protective enzymes, such as Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (SodA) and catalase I (HP I), and this induction is controlled by the regulatory proteins SoxRS, OxyR, and ArcAB. Thus, ArcAB, Fnr, SoxRS, and OxyR function in concert so that E. coli can optimize its energy production and growth rate. Fnr and SoxRS are cytoplasmic, DNA-binding proteins, and these regulatory systems utilize iron-sulfur clusters as cofactors which may directly sense the redox environment. OxyR is also a cytoplasmic, DNA-binding protein, and appears to respond to redox potential through the oxidation state of a specific cysteine residue. In the ArcAB system (which belongs to the family of two-component regulatory systems), ArcB, a membrane protein, functions as the sensor, and ArcA, a DNA-binding protein, directly controls target gene expression. Under anaerobic conditions, ArcB undergoes autophosphorylation and transphosphorylates ArcA, stimulating ArcA's DNA-binding activity. During aerobic growth, the transphosphorylation of ArcA does not occur. In this signal transduction mechanism, the ArcB C-terminal or “receiver” domain plays a critical role; that is, it stimulates or abolishes the transphosphorylation depending on the metabolic state of the cell, which in turn is influenced by the availability of oxygen. E. coli thus employs at least four global regulatory systems which monitor the cellular oxidative/metabolic conditions, and adjust the expression of more than 70 operons to give the organism a better aerobic life.
Machine learning approaches offer the potential to systematically identify transcriptional regulatory interactions from a compendium of microarray expression profiles. However, experimental validation of the performance of these methods at the genome scale has remained elusive. Here we assess the global performance of four existing classes of inference algorithms using 445 Escherichia coli Affymetrix arrays and 3,216 known E. coli regulatory interactions from RegulonDB. We also developed and applied the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm, a novel extension of the relevance networks class of algorithms. CLR demonstrates an average precision gain of 36% relative to the next-best performing algorithm. At a 60% true positive rate, CLR identifies 1,079 regulatory interactions, of which 338 were in the previously known network and 741 were novel predictions. We tested the predicted interactions for three transcription factors with chromatin immunoprecipitation, confirming 21 novel interactions and verifying our RegulonDB-based performance estimates. CLR also identified a regulatory link providing central metabolic control of iron transport, which we confirmed with real-time quantitative PCR. The compendium of expression data compiled in this study, coupled with RegulonDB, provides a valuable model system for further improvement of network inference algorithms using experimental data.
In nucleotide excision repair DNA damage is removed through incision of the damaged strand on both sides of the lesion, followed by repair synthesis, which fills the gap using the intact strand as a template, and finally ligation. In prokaryotes the damaged base is removed in a 12-13 nucleotide (nt)-long oligomer; in eukaryotes including humans the damage is excised in a 24-32 nt-long fragment. Excision in Escherichia coli is accomplished by three proteins designated UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC. In humans, by contrast, 16 polypeptides including seven xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) proteins, the trimric replication protein A [RPA, human single-stranded DNA binding protein (HSSB)], and the multisubunit (7-10) general transcription factor TFIIH are required for the dual incisions. Transcribed strands are specifically targeted for excision repair by a transcription-repair coupling factor both in E. coli and in humans. In humans, excision repair is an important defense mechanism against the two major carcinogens, sunlight and cigarette smoke. Individuals defective in excision repair exhibit a high incidence of cancer while individuals with a defect in coupling transcription to repair suffer from neurological and skeletal abnormalities.
Transcription factor Sp1 is a protein present in mammalian cells that binds to GC box promoter elements and selectively activates mRNA synthesis from genes that contain functional recognition sites. We have isolated a cDNA that encodes the 696 C-terminal amino acid residues of human Sp1. By expression of truncated fragments of Sp1 in E. coli, we have localized the DNA binding activity to the C-terminal 168 amino acid residues. In this region, Sp1 has three contiguous Zn(II) finger motifs, which are believed to be metalloprotein structures that interact with DNA. We have found that purified Sp1 requires Zn(II) for sequence-specific binding to DNA. Thus, it is likely that Sp1 interacts with DNA by binding of the Zn(II) fingers. To facilitate the identification of mutant variants of Sp1 that are defective in DNA binding, we have also devised a bacterial colony assay for detection of Sp1 binding to DNA.
We have used an S1 mapping assay to demonstrate that the mRNA transcripts of the Escherichia coli galactose operon found in intact E. coli cells with a defect in adenylate cyclase or the cyclic AMP receptor protein contain at their 5' end about five nucleotides more than the gal mRNA molecules made in wild type cells. The same difference between gal RNA synthesized in vitro in the absence of cyclic AMP or cyclic AMP receptor protein and gal RNA made in the presence of these factors is detected by this assay. Our results strongly suggest that the same two overlapping promoters, which we previously identified by in vitro transcription of gal DNA fragments, also control the expression of the galactose operon in intact cells. The intracellular levels of cyclic AMP determine which promoter is utilized.
An improved method is described for the renaturation of microgram amounts of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. The protein band is visualized in the gel by KCl staining, the band cut out and crushed, and the protein eluted by diffusion in a buffer containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Protein is concentrated and sodium dodecyl sulfate is removed by acetone precipitation of the sample. Renaturation of the protein occurs after the precipitate is dissolved in 6 m guanidine hydrochloride and then diluted. The activity of the sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase can be recovered with 98–100% efficiency after electrophoresis in an SDS-gel and renaturation by this technique. To assess whether the method is generally applicable we tested some or all of the steps involved in the procedure using E. coli transcription termination factor rho, β-galactosidase, alkaline phosphatase, wheat α-amylase, and DNA topoisomerase. We show how the method can be used to determine the approximate molecular weight of the DNA topoisomerase polypeptide by sectioning a gel on which a partially pure sample has been fractionated by electrophoresis.
Much of the information available about factors that affect mRNA decay in Escherichia coli, and by inference in other bacteria, has been gleaned from study of less than 25 of the approximately 4,300 predicted E. coli messages. To investigate these factors more broadly, we examined the half-lives and steady-state abundance of known and predicted E. coli mRNAs at single-gene resolution by using two-color fluorescent DNA microarrays. An rRNA-based strategy for normalization of microarray data was developed to permit quantitation of mRNA decay after transcriptional arrest by rifampicin. We found that globally, mRNA half-lives were similar in nutrient-rich media and defined media in which the generation time was approximately tripled. A wide range of stabilities was observed for individual mRNAs of E. coli, although approximately 80% of all mRNAs had half-lives between 3 and 8 min. Genes having biologically related metabolic functions were commonly observed to have similar stabilities. Whereas the half-lives of a limited number of mRNAs correlated positively with their abundance, we found that overall, increased mRNA stability is not predictive of increased abundance. Neither the density of putative sites of cleavage by RNase E, which is believed to initiate mRNA decay in E. coli, nor the free energy of folding of 5' or 3' untranslated region sequences was predictive of mRNA half-life. Our results identify previously unsuspected features of mRNA decay at a global level and also indicate that generalizations about decay derived from the study of individual gene transcripts may have limited applicability.
The PurR transcription factor plays a critical role in transcriptional regulation of purine metabolism in enterobacteria. Here, we elucidate the role of PurR under exogenous adenine stimulation at the genome-scale using high-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)–chip and gene expression data obtained under in vivo conditions. Analysis of microarray data revealed that adenine stimulation led to changes in transcript level of about 10% of Escherichia coli genes, including the purine biosynthesis pathway. The E. coli strain lacking the purR gene showed that a total of 56 genes are affected by the deletion. From the ChIP–chip analysis, we determined that over 73% of genes directly regulated by PurR were enriched in the biosynthesis, utilization and transport of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, and 20% of them were functionally unknown. Compared to the functional diversity of the regulon of the other general transcription factors in E. coli, the functions and size of the PurR regulon are limited.
▪ Abstract Proteolysis in Escherichia coli serves to rid the cell of abnormal and misfolded proteins and to limit the time and amounts of availability of critical regulatory proteins. Most intracellular proteolysis is initiated by energy-dependent proteases, including Lon, ClpXP, and HflB; HflB is the only essential E. coli protease. The ATPase domains of these proteases mediate substrate recognition. Recognition elements in target are not well defined, but are probably not specific amino acid sequences. Naturally unstable protein substrates include the regulatory sigma factors for heat shock and stationary phase gene expression, σ32 and RpoS. Other cellular proteins serve as environmental sensors that modulate the availability of the unstable proteins to the proteases, resulting in rapid changes in sigma factor levels and therefore in gene transcription. Many of the specific proteases found in E. coli are well-conserved in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and serve critical functions in developmental systems.
We track the motion of individual fluorescently labeled mRNA molecules inside live E. coli cells. We find that the motion is subdiffusive, with an exponent that is robust to physiological changes, including the disruption of cytoskeletal elements. By modifying the parameters of the RNA molecule and the bacterial cell, we are able to examine the possible mechanisms that can lead to this unique type of motion, especially the effect of macromolecular crowding. We also examine the implications of anomalous diffusion on the kinetics of bacterial gene regulation, in particular, how transcription factors find their DNA targets.
Quantitative views of cellular functions require precise measures of rates of biomolecule production, especially proteins-the direct effectors of biological processes. Here, we present a genome-wide approach, based on ribosome profiling, for measuring absolute protein synthesis rates. The resultant E. coli data set transforms our understanding of the extent to which protein synthesis is precisely controlled to optimize function and efficiency. Members of multiprotein complexes are made in precise proportion to their stoichiometry, whereas components of functional modules are produced differentially according to their hierarchical role. Estimates of absolute protein abundance also reveal principles for optimizing design. These include how the level of different types of transcription factors is optimized for rapid response and how a metabolic pathway (methionine biosynthesis) balances production cost with activity requirements. Our studies reveal how general principles, important both for understanding natural systems and for synthesizing new ones, emerge from quantitative analyses of protein synthesis.
▪ Abstract The promoter recognition specificity of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase is modulated by replacement of the σ subunit in the first step and by interaction with transcription factors in the second step. The overall differentiated state of ∼2000 molecules of the RNA polymerase in a single cell can be estimated after measurement of both the intracellular concentrations and the RNA polymerase-binding affinities for all seven species of the σ subunit and 100–150 transcription factors. The anticipated impact from this line of systematic approach is that the prediction of the expression hierarchy of ∼4000 genes on the E. coli genome can be estimated.
ABSTRACT The genome DNA of Escherichia coli is associated with about 10 DNA-binding structural proteins, altogether forming the nucleoid. The nucleoid proteins play some functional roles, besides their structural roles, in the global regulation of such essential DNA functions as replication, recombination, and transcription. Using a quantitative Western blot method, we have performed for the first time a systematic determination of the intracellular concentrations of 12 species of the nucleoid protein in E. coli W3110, including CbpA (curved DNA-binding protein A), CbpB (curved DNA-binding protein B, also known as Rob [right origin binding protein]), DnaA (DNA-binding protein A), Dps (DNA-binding protein from starved cells), Fis (factor for inversion stimulation), Hfq (host factor for phage Q β ), H-NS (histone-like nucleoid structuring protein), HU (heat-unstable nucleoid protein), IciA (inhibitor of chromosome initiation A), IHF (integration host factor), Lrp (leucine-responsive regulatory protein), and StpA (suppressor of td mutant phenotype A). Intracellular protein levels reach a maximum at the growing phase for nine proteins, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Fis, Hfq, H-NS, HU, IciA, Lrp, and StpA, which may play regulatory roles in DNA replication and/or transcription of the growth-related genes. In descending order, the level of accumulation, calculated in monomers, in growing E. coli cells is Fis, Hfq, HU, StpA, H-NS, IHF*, CbpB (Rob), Dps*, Lrp, DnaA, IciA, and CbpA* (stars represent the stationary-phase proteins). The order of abundance, in descending order, in the early stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, HU, Hfq, H-NS, StpA, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, CbpA, and Fis, while that in the late stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, Hfq, HU, CbpA*, StpA, H-NS, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, and Fis. Thus, the major protein components of the nucleoid change from Fis and HU in the growing phase to Dps in the stationary phase. The curved DNA-binding protein, CbpA, appears only in the late stationary phase. These changes in the composition of nucleoid-associated proteins in the stationary phase are accompanied by compaction of the genome DNA and silencing of the genome functions.
The htpR gene of E. coli encodes a positive regulator of the heat-shock response. We have fused the htpR gene to the inducible PL promoter of phage lambda. Overproduction of HtpR following a temperature upshift resulted in the overexpression of heat-shock proteins. We describe the purification and initial in vitro characterization of the factor controlling expression of heat-shock genes. The factor was the 32 kd htpR gene product. In vitro, a mixture of HtpR and core RNA polymerase initiated transcription at heat-shock promoters. The sigma factor encoded by rpoD was not required for this reaction. Therefore, HtpR is a sigma factor that promotes transcription initiation at heat-shock promoters. We propose that htpR be renamed rpoH and that the gene product be called sigma-32.
ABSTRACT The genome-wide location of RNA polymerase binding sites was determined in Escherichia coli using chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays (chIP-chip). Cross-linked chromatin was isolated in triplicate from rifampin-treated cells, and DNA bound to RNA polymerase was precipitated with an antibody specific for the β′ subunit. The DNA was amplified and hybridized to “tiled” oligonucleotide microarrays representing the whole genome at 25-bp resolution. A total of 1,139 binding sites were detected and evaluated by comparison to gene expression data from identical conditions and to 961 promoters previously identified by established methods. Of the detected binding sites, 418 were located within 1,000 bp of a known promoter, leaving 721 previously unknown RNA polymerase binding sites. Within 200 bp, we were able to detect 51% (189/368) of the known σ70-specific promoters occurring upstream of an expressed open reading frame and 74% (273/368) within 1,000 bp. Conversely, many known promoters were not detected by chIP-chip, leading to an estimated 26% negative-detection rate. Most of the detected binding sites could be associated with expressed transcription units, but 299 binding sites occurred near inactive transcription units. This map of RNA polymerase binding sites represents a foundation for studies of transcription factors in E. coli and an important evaluation of the chIP-chip technique.
Abstract Metabolism controls gene expression through allosteric interactions between metabolites and transcription factors. These interactions are usually measured with in vitro assays, but there are no methods to identify them at a genome-scale in vivo. Here we show that dynamic transcriptome and metabolome data identify metabolites that control transcription factors in E. coli . By switching an E. coli culture between starvation and growth, we induce strong metabolite concentration changes and gene expression changes. Using Network Component Analysis we calculate the activities of 209 transcriptional regulators and correlate them with metabolites. This approach captures, for instance, the in vivo kinetics of CRP regulation by cyclic-AMP. By testing correlations between all pairs of transcription factors and metabolites, we predict putative effectors of 71 transcription factors, and validate five interactions in vitro. These results show that combining transcriptomics and metabolomics generates hypotheses about metabolism-transcription interactions that drive transitions between physiological states.
Quorum sensing is a cell-to-cell signalling mechanism in which bacteria secrete hormone-like compounds called autoinducers. When these auto-inducers reach a certain threshold concentration, they interact with bacterial transcriptional regulators, thereby regulating gene expression. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) O157:H7 as well as E. coli K-12 produces the autoinducer-2 (AI-2), which is synthesized by the product of the luxS gene, and previous work from our laboratory has shown that genes encoding the EHEC type III secretion system were activated by quorum sensing. Recently, by hybridizing an E. coli K-12 gene array with cDNA synthesized from RNA extracted from EHEC strain 86-24 and its isogenic luxS mutant, we observed that other potential virulence-associated factors, such as genes encoding the expression and assembly of flagella, motility and chemotaxis, were also activated by quorum sensing. The array data also indicated that several genes encoding putative E. coli regulators were controlled by quorum sensing. In this report, we describe a two-component system regulated by quorum sensing that shares homology with Salmonella typhimurium PmrAB, which we have named quorum sensing E. coli regulator B and C (QseBC). The qseBC genes, previously identified only as open reading frames b3025 and b3026, are organized in an operon in the E. coli chromosome, with qseB encoding the response regulator and qseC the sensor kinase. We confirmed the regulation of qseBC by quorum sensing using qseB::lacZ transcriptional fusions and characterized the phenotypes of an isogenic qseC mutation in EHEC. This mutant expressed less flagellin and had reduced motility compared with the wild-type and complemented strains. Transcription of flhD, fliA, motA and fliC::lacZ fusions was decreased in the qseC mutant, suggesting that qseBC is a transcriptional regulator of flagella genes. A qseC mutant was also generated in E. coli K-12 strain MC1000 that showed the same phenotypes as the EHEC mutant, indicating that qseBC regulates flagella and motility by quorum sensing in both EHEC and K-12. QseBC activates transcription of flhDC, which is the master regulator for the flagella and motility genes and, in the absence of flhD, QseBC failed to activate the transcription of fliA. Motility of a luxS, but not of a qseC, mutant can be restored by providing AI-2 exogenously as preconditioned media, suggesting that the qseC mutant is unable to respond to AI-2. However, QseC has no effect on the expression of other quorum sensing-controlled genes such as those encoding for the type III secretion system. These data indicate that QseBC is one component of the quorum-sensing regulatory cascade in both EHEC and K-12 that is involved in the regulation of flagella and motility genes, but that additional regulators in this cascade remain to be characterized.
sigma E, an RNA polymerase sigma factor of apparent M(r) 28,000, was previously identified by its ability to direct transcription from the P2 promoter of the agarose gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal sequence of purified sigma E, was used to isolate the sigma E gene (sigE). The predicted sequence of sigma E shows greatest similarity to sequences of seven other proteins: Myxococcus xanthus CarQ, Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU, Pseudomonas syringae HrpL, Escherichia coli sigma E, Alcaligenes eutrophus CnrH, E. coli FecI, and Bacillus subtilis SigX, a protein of unknown function. These eight proteins define a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors sufficiently different from other sigma s that, in many cases, they are not identified by standard similarity searching methods. Available information suggests that all of them regulate extracytoplasmic functions and that they function as effector molecules responding to extracytoplasmic stimuli. A. eutrophus CnrH appears to be a plasmid-encoded factor.
Cell-free protein synthesis is becoming a powerful technique to construct and to study complex informational processes in vitro. Engineering synthetic gene circuits in a test tube, however, is seriously limited by the transcription repertoire of modern cell-free systems, composed of only a few bacteriophage regulatory elements. Here, we report the construction and the phenomenological characterization of synthetic gene circuits engineered with a cell-free expression toolbox that works with the seven E. coli sigma factors. The E. coli endogenous holoenzyme E70 is used as the primary transcription machinery. Elementary circuit motifs, such as multiple stage cascades, AND gate and negative feedback loops are constructed with the six other sigma factors, two bacteriophage RNA polymerases, and a set of repressors. The circuit dynamics reveal the importance of the global mRNA turnover rate and of passive competition-induced transcriptional regulation. Cell-free reactions can be carried out over long periods of time with a small-scale dialysis reactor or in phospholipid vesicles, an artificial cell system. This toolbox is a unique platform to study complex transcription/translation-based biochemical systems in vitro.
It has long been known that cell-cell adhesiveness is generally reduced in human cancers. Tumor cells are dissociated throughout the entire tumor masses of diffuse-type cancers, whereas those of solid tumors with high metastatic potentials are often focally dissociated or dedifferentiated at the invading fronts. Thus, both irreversible and reversible mechanisms for inactivating the cell adhesion system appear to exist. This paper focuses on the cadherin system, which mediates Ca2+-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion. The E (epithelial)-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in cancer cells is inactivated by multiple mechanisms corresponding to the pathological features described above. Mutations have been found in the genes for E-cadherin and its undercoat proteins, alpha- and beta-catenins, which connect cadherins to actin filaments and establish firm cell-cell adhesion. Transcriptional inactivation of E-cadherin expression was shown to occur frequently in tumor progression. E-cadherin expression in human cancer cells is regulated by CpG methylation around the promoter region. The cadherin system interacts directly with products of oncogenes, eg, cerbB-2 protein and the epidermal growth factor receptor, and of the tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, through beta-catenin, which may be important in signal transduction pathways contributing to the determination of the biological properties of human cancers. In conclusion, inactivation of the E-cadherin system by multiple mechanisms, including both genetic and epigenetic events, plays a significant role in multistage carcinogenesis.
Focus Review22 May 2012free access The many faces and functions of β-catenin Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Author Information Tomas Valenta1, George Hausmann1 and Konrad Basler 1 1Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland *Corresponding author. Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zurich 8057, Switzerland. Tel.:+41 44 635 3111; Fax:+41 44 635 6864; E-mail: [email protected] The EMBO Journal (2012)31:2714-2736https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.150 PDFDownload PDF of article text and main figures. ToolsAdd to favoritesDownload CitationsTrack CitationsPermissions ShareFacebookTwitterLinked InMendeleyWechatReddit Figures & Info β-Catenin (Armadillo in Drosophila) is a multitasking and evolutionary conserved molecule that in metazoans exerts a crucial role in a multitude of developmental and homeostatic processes. More specifically, β-catenin is an integral structural component of cadherin-based adherens junctions, and the key nuclear effector of canonical Wnt signalling in the nucleus. Imbalance in the structural and signalling properties of β-catenin often results in disease and deregulated growth connected to cancer and metastasis. Intense research into the life of β-catenin has revealed a complex picture. Here, we try to capture the state of the art: we try to summarize and make some sense of the processes that regulate β-catenin, as well as the plethora of β-catenin binding partners. One focus will be the interaction of β-catenin with different transcription factors and the potential implications of these interactions for direct cross-talk between β-catenin and non-Wnt signalling pathways. Introduction Wnt signalling represents one of a few key molecular cascades that regulate cell fate in animals throughout their lifespan. Already during embryonic development Wnt-regulated β-catenin critically contributes to the establishment of the body axis and the orchestration of tissue and organ development. In adult organs, Wnt signalling continues to play indispensable roles in tissue homeostasis, cell renewal, and regeneration. Interaction of Wnt ligands with their receptor complexes triggers several intracellular signalling cascades; these are, traditionally, separated into two types according to the role played by β-catenin. In the canonical Wnt cascade, β-catenin is the key effector responsible for transduction of the signal to the nucleus and it triggers transcription of Wnt-specific genes responsible for the control of cell fate decisions in many cells and tissues. The second type of Wnt signalling is independent of β-catenin signalling function and comprises, among others, the Wnt/PCP (Planar Cell Polarity) and Wnt-dependent/protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathways (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). We will focus here on β-catenin-dependent signalling and refer the interested reader to the following excellent reviews on the other types of Wnt signalling (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). But β-catenin is not just a component of the Wnt signal cascade (Figure 1). In the late 1980s, β-catenin was independently discovered twice, on the basis of its different functions: structural and signalling. The group of Rolf Kemler isolated β-catenin, together with two other molecules (α-catenin and γ-catenin/plakoglobin), as proteins associated with E-cadherin, the key molecule of Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion. These proteins were named catenins (in Latin catena means chain) to reflect their linking of E-cadherin to cytoskeletal structures (Ozawa et al, 1989). The signalling potential of β-catenin was exposed through its Drosophila orthologue Armadillo: the armadillo gene was discovered in the seminal screens for mutations affecting segmentation of the Drosophila embryo, performed by Eric Wieschaus, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, and Gerd Jürgens (Wieschaus et al, 1984). Whereas the wild-type embryonic cuticle contains segments with alternating rows of denticles and naked belts, segments in armadillo mutants form only a lawn of denticles, the naked belts are missing. Such phenotypes resemble wingless null mutants (Wieschaus and Riggleman, 1987). Further analysis of Armadillo performed by the laboratories of Eric Wieschaus, Mark Peifer, and others revealed the conservation of its structural function in adherens junctions (McCrea et al, 1990; Peifer and Wieschaus, 1990; Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). Epistatic analysis determined that the armadillo segmentation function is regulated by Wingless (Riggleman et al, 1990). This finding was a key step in the subsequent characterization of the Wnt/β-catenin (or Wingless/Armadillo, respectively) signalling cascade, and of the functions and mutual interactions of its individual components. Another important part of this mosaic was revealed by the description of the basic pathway leading from the Wingless ligand through Dishevelled to regulation of Armadillo stability by Shaggy/Zeste-white-3 (GSK3 in vertebrates) (Siegfried et al, 1994). Finally in the mid-1990's several groups independently found that the signalling function of β-catenin/Armadillo in the nucleus is mediated via T-cell factor (TCF)/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors, which in association with β-catenin trigger Wnt-mediated transcription (Behrens et al, 1996; Huber et al, 1996; Molenaar et al, 1996; Brunner et al, 1997; van de Wetering et al, 1997). The generation of conditional β-catenin mouse mutants (either knockout or constitutively active) has revealed that a vast array of developmental processes is regulated by the multitasking β-catenin in mammalian embryonic and adult tissues (reviewed in detail by Grigoryan et al, 2008). Figure 1.The life of β-catenin within the cell. Newly synthesized β-catenin is immobilized by E-cadherin at adherens junctions, where it can interact also with α-catenin, thereby indirectly modulating the actin cytoskeleton. β-catenin can be released from the adherens junctions by the activity of protein kinases or by downregulation of E-cadherin. Free excess β-catenin is immediately phosphorylated by the destruction complex and thus marked for subsequent degradation. A portion of β-catenin can be kept in the cytoplasm protected by APC. Wnt signalling blocks the activity of the destruction complex resulting in increased levels of cytolasmic β-catenin, which is translocated to the nucleus. In the nucleus, β-catenin associates with transcription factors from the TCF/Lef family and drives transcription of Wnt/β-catenin target genes. Other factors can also provide β-catenin with a DNA binding platform, often counteracting canonical Wnt signalling. Signalling activity of β-catenin in the nucleus can be regulated by modulating its nuclear import/export. Besides its structural role in the adherens junctions and signalling activity in the nucleus, β-catenin may also play an important function in the centrosome. CTTA, C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators, NTTA, N-Terminal Transcriptional Activators. Download figure Download PowerPoint The many roles of β-catenin beg the question as to how an evolutionarily conserved pathway can control so many varied processes during animal development and tissue homeostasis via one central molecule? Further, how is the final transcriptional output of β-catenin determined and modulated? Part of the explanation might be found in the plethora of β-catenin binding partners that either affect its transcriptional output or permit its direct cross-talk with other transcription factors and signalling pathways. In this review, we will discuss the following aspects: how is the β-catenin protein regulated, how might different transcriptional co-activators of β-catenin lead to diverse outcomes, how can β-catenin affect the activity of various transcription factors, and finally, what are the potential implications of a direct cross-talk between β-catenin and other signalling pathways? The structure of β-catenin determines its role as a scaffold molecule The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is one of a small set of conserved signalling cascades (together with Notch, Hedgehog, TGFβ/BMP, Hippo, and receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated pathways) that regulate animal development from Cnidarians to mammals. β-Catenin's orchestration of developmental processes is the sum of its dual roles—signalling and structural—as elegantly illustrated by the work of Lyashenko et al (2011): mouse Emryonic Stem Cells (mESC) lacking β-catenin lose their ability to differentiate into a mesodermal germ layer and do not form any neuroepithelium; both defects are connected to defective cell–cell junctions arising during the differentiation processes. Putting back a signalling-defective β-catenin restores the integrity of adherens junction and importantly also the ability of mESC to form neuroepithelial structures and endoderm. However the mesoderm formation is not rescued and thus requires also intact β-catenin transcription (Lyashenko et al, 2011). Similarly in the developing dorsal neural tube and the migrating population of neural crest cells the loss of β-catenin results in more drastic phenotypes than only blocking the β-catenin signalling outputs, further showing that the two roles of β-catenin cause an additive effect (Valenta et al, 2011). Such overlap and possible separation of β-catenin roles was also demonstrated in a seminal analysis in Drosophila more than a decade ago (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). How can the β-catenin protein mediate both distinct adhesive and signalling activities? The answer is in the structural composition of β-catenin. The β-catenin protein (781 aa residues in humans) consists of a central region (residues 141–664) made up of 12 imperfect Armadillo repeats (R1–12) that are flanked by distinct N- and C-terminal domains, NTD and CTD, respectively. A specific conserved helix (Helix-C) is located proximally to the CTD, adjacent to the last ARM repeat (residues 667–683) (Xing et al, 2008; Figure 2). The NTD and the CTD may be structurally flexible, whereas the central region forms a relatively rigid scaffold. This scaffold serves as an interaction platform for many β-catenin binding partners, at the membrane, in cytosol, and in the nucleus (Huber et al, 1997). Figure 2.β-Catenin serves as a binding platform for a multitude of interaction partners in adherens junctions, in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. (A) The β-catenin protein consists of a central region composed of 12 Armadillo repeats (numbered boxes), flanked by an amino-terminal domain (NTD) and a carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). Between the last Armadillo repeat and the flexible part of the CTD is the conserved helix-C (C). Coloured bars show experimentally validated binding sites for β-catenin interaction partners. Colour code: purple, components of adherens junctions; blue, members of the β-catenin destruction complex; red, transcriptional co-activators; green, transcription factors providing DNA binding; gray, transcriptional inhibitors. C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators (CTTA), the critical domain for their binding is marked by brackets. Little circles indicate phosphorylation sites on either E-cadherin or APC that enhance the interactions. APC, Adenoma Polyposis Coli; TCF/Lef, T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer factor; AR, Androgen Receptor; LRH-1, Liver Receptor Homologue-1; ICAT, Inhibitor of β-catenin and TCF; BCL9, B-cell lymphoma-9. (B) The C-terminus of β-catenin serves as a binding factor for a multitude of complexes promoting β-catenin-mediated transcription. Experimentally validated binding motifs for particular proteins are indicated. In the grey boxes, the function is indicated of the particular β-catenin interactor or of a complex, where this binding partner is a member. Brg-1 is also known as SMARCA4, CBP as CREBBP. HAT, histone acetyl-transferase; HMT, histone methyl-transferase; MLL, mixed lineage leukaemia; PAF-1, Polymerase-associated factor-1; PIC, Pre-Initiation Complex; TBP, TATA-box Binding Protein; TRRAP, Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein. Download figure Download PowerPoint β-Catenin is a founding member of the Armadillo (ARM) repeat protein superfamily. Each ARM repeat of its central region comprises ∼42 residues, forming three helices arranged in triangular shape. Together, all ARM repeats form a superhelix that features a long, positively charged groove. Biochemical and crystal structure analyses revealed that many of β-catenin's binding partners share overlapping binding sites in the groove of the central β-catenin region: consequently, these partners cannot bind to β-catenin simultaneously. This mutual exclusivity is certainly valid for the key β-catenin interacting molecules: E-cadherin (the main partner in adherens junctions), APC (the main partner in the destruction complex), and TCF/Lef (the main partner in the nucleus). All these β-catenin interactors bind to the core binding site comprising ARM repeats R3–R9, where they form salt bridges with two key amino-acid residues, Lys312 and Lys435. Other ARM repeats are also involved, at least in strengthening the interaction (Graham et al, 2000; Eklof Spink et al, 2001; Huber and Weis, 2001; Poy et al, 2001). The spatial segregation of the different β-catenin binding partners within the cell may be important for enabling the function of these proteins. However, the competition among them for β-catenin is also important for regulating canonical Wnt signalling. Conformational changes of β-catenin may also help regulate its binding properties: the terminal regions of β-catenin (NTD and especially CTD) have been proposed to fold back on the central region affecting, for example, the binding of TCF/Lef (Castaño et al, 2002; Solanas et al, 2004). Biochemical evidence supports the model that β-catenin-mediated transcription is performed by a monomeric, back-folded form of β-catenin, whereas a cadherin-binding dimeric form is associated with α-catenin in adherens junctions (Gottardi and Gumbiner, 2004). Interestingly, Helix-C within the most N-terminal part of the CTD was shown to be essential for the signalling activity of β-catenin, while being completely dispensable for its role in cell–cell adhesion (Xing et al, 2008). This is not surprising, as a plethora of β-catenin transcriptional co-activators require an intact Helix-C (or region R12-Helix-C) for their proper binding (Figure 2; Mosimann et al, 2009). The crucial role of this part of β-catenin was predicted and experimentally demonstrated more than a decade ago by elegant in-vivo analyses of different mutants of Armadillo (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). In these studies, mutants of Armadillo (point mutations or deletions) were produced, some interfered with the adhesion function, but not with its role in Wnt signalling, and vice versa: revealing that the two functions of Arm are separable. Some of these mutations specifically hit Helix-C and abrogated the signalling role but perfectly preserved the structural function of Armadillo. Recently, the ability to completely block the signalling output of Armadillo, without affecting its adhesive role, was confirmed and experimentally extended to β-catenin in mice (Valenta et al, 2011). Interestingly, the functional separation of the two roles occurred evolutionarily in Caenorhabdidis elegans. This nematode has at least three specialized β-catenins: the adhesion-specific HMP-2 that binds cadherins but not TCFs, and two signalling ones, BAR-1 and WRM-1, that can bind TCFs and regulate transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Yet another C. elegans protein, SYS-1, has adopted a signalling role, although it is not related to β-catenin on the sequence level. SYS-1 structurally mimics β-catenin (the positively charged groove), interacts with TCFs, and even mediates transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Such examples of functional separation, however, appear to be the exception. In the majority of animal species (including the model organisms Drosophila, Xenopus, and mouse), a single β-catenin carries out the two functions. These functions may be carried out by different protein pools and are orchestrated by mechanisms (e.g., post-translational modifications), which control the spatial separation, retention, or stability of β-catenin. That said, in vertebrates γ-catenin (plakoglobin), a close relative of β-catenin, may in certain cases compensate for the loss of β-catenin's structural function; in contrast, the signalling role of β-catenin in vivo seems not to be compensated (Huelsken et al, 2000; Grigoryan et al, 2008). The role of plakoglobin in Wnt/β-catenin signalling warrants further clarification. β-Catenin is an evolutionarily conserved protein The usually single β-catenin gene represents the highly conserved centre piece within the complex expanded Wnt signalling pathway (Figure 3). The Wnt pathway features a multitude of paralogous components, especially at the level of Wnt ligands and their receptors. The complexity at the level of the Wnt ligands and receptors (Frizzled proteins) seems to have arisen early in metazoan evolution. In Cnidarians, 14 Wnt genes have been identified which belong to 12 of the 13 known different Wnt subfamilies, 11 of which are also present in vertebrates, where some additional duplication events within individual subfamilies lead to expression of up to 19 different Wnts in mammals (Kusserow et al, 2005). In sponges (Porifera), which constitute some of the most basal metazoans, the Wnt ligand complexity is not as high, only three (respectively two) Wnt ligands are known (Lapébie et al, 2009; Adamska et al, 2010). Figure 3.β-Catenin is an evolutionarily ancient molecule that provided its function before Wnt signalling and classical cadherin-based adhesion appeared. Schematic evolutionary tree showing the relationships among Amoebozoa (represented by Dictyostelium discoideum) and metazoa, as well as the diversity of signalling components. In Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin acts as a functional molecule in polarized epithelia. In animals (metazoa), β-catenin plays a dual role as a signalling component of canonical Wnt signalling or as a structural component of cadherin-based cell–cell junctions. The presence of β-catenin and key components of adherens junctions (classical cadherins—containing an intracellular domain binding to β-catenin) and of canonical Wnt signalling (Wnt ligands, TCF/Lef transcription factors) is indicated to the right. In the case of Wnt ligands, the first number indicates how many different Wnt ligands were determined, the second number in brackets indicates how many Wnt subfamilies were determined in a particular group. The number in the case of TCF/Lef refers to how many different TCF/Lef proteins were found. Yes means presence, no absence. The following animal species were compared: Porifera (Sponges): Amphimedon queenslandica, Cnidaria: Nematostella vectans, Insects: Drosophila melanogaster; Vertebrates: Mus musculus. Download figure Download PowerPoint In sponges, ctenophores, and cnidarians, one gene encodes a β-catenin protein with striking sequence similarity to mammalian β-catenin. Cnidarian β-catenin (e.g., of the polyp Hydra) exhibits >60% of amino-acid identity with mammalian β-catenin, with the main differences being found in the most C-terminal part, which is generally less conserved (Xing et al, 2008; Zhao et al, 2011). The structural identity of the repeat domain of β-catenin is nearly 80%. Moreover, locus conservation among sponges (Amphimedon sp.), cnidarians (sea anemone Nematostella vectans) and later developed metazoans (Deuterostomia; vertebrates belong to this group) includes even the exon/intron features of the β-catenin gene (Holland et al, 2005; Adamska et al, 2010). Highlighting the pivotal role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling also in early metazoans are findings that changes in β-catenin levels dramatically impact their development. In sponges (Porifera), the activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling by blocking β-catenin degradation leads to the formation of ectopic ostia (canal openings), which can disrupt feeding (Lapébie et al, 2009). In Hydra (Cnidaria), ectopic stabilization of β-catenin results in multiple head and tentacle formation along the body, while the opposite phenotype, a loss of head structures, results from depletion of β-catenin (Broun et al, 2005; Müller et al, 2007; Gee et al, 2010). Such observations suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signalling represents a primeval component, driving metazoan body plan and axis formation since the beginning of animal evolution. The critical role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling for establishing the primary body axis (Petersen and Reddien, 2009), or more precisely A/P (anterior/posterior) identity, has been long studied in diverse organisms. It is a re-occuring theme and reveals itself either in individual (para)segments, as in the Drosophila embryo, or of whole developing body plans, such as in vertebrates (Sanson, 2001; Niehrs, 2010). A paradigmatic example showing the indispensable role of β-catenin in the process of axial patterning came from experiments in the amphibian Xenopus laevis: ectopic expression of β-catenin in ventral blastomeres of Xenopus embryos induces axis duplication (i.e., the formation of a secondary axis), a phenotype reminiscent of misexpression of several Wnt ligands (Guger and Gumbiner, 1995). Depletion of β-catenin results in the opposite effect, ventralization of the embryo with a shortened A/P axis (Haesman et al, 1994). A/P axis identity and mesoderm formation is controlled by β-catenin-mediated transcription also in mammals, since mouse embryos lacking β-catenin do not develop a proper A/P axis and fail to form mesoderm, resulting in corrupted gastrulation (Haegel et al, 1995; Huelsken et al, 2000). Interestingly, a homologue of β-catenin was found also in the non-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum (slime mould) (Coates et al, 2002). This contrasts with the lack of Wnt ligands, and indeed of most proteins involved in Wnt signalling, which so far have been identified solely in metazoans but not in any other phyla (Figure 3). In normal circumstances, Dictyostelium discoideum is a unicellular organism; but in response to starvation single cells start to aggregate and form fruiting bodies, which comprise a rigid stalk and on its tip a collection of spores. During the formation of a fruiting body the aggregated cells establish a polarized epithelium that is essential for the subsequent multicellular phase of development. Even though Dictyostelium discoideum, in contrast to metazoans, lacks classical cadherins, the β-catenin orthologue Aardvark is an essential structural molecule in the polarized epithelia. Moreover, to maintain the proper epithelial structure Aardvark cooperates with α-catenin, another key structural molecule known from metazoans. Ddα-catenin is upregulated during the transition to multicellularity and colocalizes with Aardvark and F-actin at the sites of cell–cell contact. Loss or knockdown of either Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin or Ddα-catenin significantly compromises epithelial morphology, polarity, and formation of fruiting bodies (Dickinson et al, 2011). Thus, β-catenin, together with α-catenin and most likely actin, can promote primitive cell–cell contacts even without cadherins. These observations suggest that the principles underlying metazoan multicellularity may be more ancient than previously thought and that the structural role of β-catenin precedes its signalling role in the canonical Wnt pathway—β-catenin and α-catenin were engaged in the formation of polarized epithelia before classical catenins came on the scene in metazoans. However, even in Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin is not exclusively a structural molecule. In response to cAMP, a series of events leads to phosphorylation of GSK3, an orthologue of GSKA that phosphorylates Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin. This phosphorylation event activates Aardvark and leads to gene transcription via a so far unknown mechanism, as there are no TCF/Lef transcription factors in Dictyostelium discoideum (Grimson et al, 2000). Even though the mechanism seems different from the core Wnt/β-catenin pathway (phosphorylation leads to activation, not to degradation), at least the interaction between β-catenin and GSK3 is present and may have further evolved into the mode of action typical for canonical Wnt signalling. Canonical signalling in a nutshell Without a Wnt signal, the levels of cytoplasmic free β-catenin are kept low (Figure 1). If not bound to E-cadherin, β-catenin is phosphorylated in the cytoplasm by the activity of a multiprotein destruction complex, marking β-catenin for degradation. This complex consists of the scaffold proteins Axin and Adenoma Polyposis Coli (APC), and of the kinases phosphorylating β-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), casein kinase 1 (CK1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) (Kimelman and Xu, 2006). The binding of Wnt ligands to the Frizzled transmembrane receptors and LRP5/6 co-receptors (Low density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein) starts a series of molecular events leading to inhibition of the β-catenin destruction complex. Ligand activated Frizzled receptors recruit the cytoplasmic protein Dishevelled (Dvl) to the receptor complex through direct binding; Dvl subsequently multimerizes and induces formation of so-called LRP-associated Wnt signalosomes (Bilic et al, 2007). Dvl in turn recruits the rate-limiting component Axin (most likely together with associated kinases, such as GSK3) and thus destabilizes the β-catenin destruction complex (Schwarz-Romond et al, 2007). Dvl-mediated phosporylation of LRP5/6 by CK1 is key for proper functioning of the Wnt signalosome as it leads to a block of GSK3 kinase activity (Zeng et al, 2008). Unphosphorylated β-catenin escapes degradation, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and translocates to the nucleus. Nuclear β-catenin associates with DNA-binding transcription factors of the TCF/Lef family. TCF/Lef proteins possess only limited ability to activate transcription. In the absence of Wnt signals, TCF/Lef factors act as transcriptional repressors. The binding of β-catenin converts TCF/Lef proteins into bipartite TCF/β-catenin transcriptional activators, converting the Wnt signal into the transcription of specific target genes (Najdi et al, 2011; Archbold et al, 2012). Albeit elegant, recent work has made clear that such a simplified, linear scheme describing the translation of the Wnt signal via β-catenin into a cell-specific genetic program does not capture the full complexity of β-catenin-mediated functions within Wnt receiving cells. β-Catenin at the membrane: balancing adhesion and signalling The majority of β-catenin is located at the cytoplasmic side of the membrane as a component of cadherin-based cell–cell connections in the absence of a Wnt stimulus. Cadherin-based adherens junctions contribute to forming polarized epithelial tissues, a characteristic metazoan feature necessary for maintaining organismal integrity (Meng and Takeichi, 2009). Cadherins are single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins that engage in Ca2+-dependent homotypic interactions via their extracellular regions and that also link to β-catenin through their cytoplasmic tails. Classical cadherins were named for the tissue in which they were most prominently expressed: for example, epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) in epithelial cells; neural cadherin (N-cadherin) in the nervous system. Many cell types co-express several cadherins (Meng and Takeichi, 2009; Stepniak et al, 2009). β-Catenin can interact with the cytoplasmic domain of all of them, but most studied are the functional consequences of the β-catenin–E-cadherin interaction. The cadherin–β-catenin interaction is constitutive and may occur even in single isolated cells in an adhesion-independent way (Stepniak et al, 2009). Newly synthesized E-cadherin associates with β-catenin while still in the endoplasmic reticulum and the two proteins move together to the cell membrane. Interfering with the binding of β-catenin to E-cadherin results in proteasomal degradation of the cadherin, because β-catenin shields a PEST sequence motif on E-cadherin, which, if free, is recognized by a ubiquitin ligase that marks E-cadherin for degradation (Hinc et al, 1994). Reciprocally, E-cadherin association stabilizes β-catenin by preventing binding of components of the β-catenin destruction complex (namely APC and Axin) (Huber and Weis, 2001). At cadherin-based cell–cell junctions, β-catenin can bind α-catenin with distal parts of the NTD and the adjacent first ARM repeat of β-catenin close to a hinge region around Arg151 (Figure 2; Pokutta and Weis 2000; Xing et al, 2008). In close proximity, C-terminal to this hinge, is the binding site for BCL9, an important transcriptional co-activator of β-catenin (Hoffm
In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the production of many virulence factors and secondary metabolites is regulated in concert with cell density through quorum sensing. Two quorum-sensing regulons have been identified in which the LuxR homologues LasR and RhlR are activated by N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (OdDHL) and N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (BHL) respectively. The lasR and rhlR genes are linked to the luxl homologues lasl and rhll, which are responsible for synthesis of OdDHL and BHL, respectively. As lasRl and rhlRl are both involved in regulating synthesis of exoenzymes such as elastase, we sought to determine the nature of their interrelationship. By using lacZ transcriptional fusions in both homologous (P. aeruginosa) and heterologous (Escherichia coli) genetic backgrounds we provide evidence that (i) lasR is expressed constitutively throughout the growth cycle, (ii) rhlR expression is regulated by LasR/OdDHL, and (iii) that RhlR/BHL regulates rhll. We also show that expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor gene rpoS is abolished in a P. aeruginosa lasR mutant and in the pleiotropic BHL-negative mutant PANO67. Furthermore, our data reveal that kin E. coli, an rpoS-lacZ fusion is regulated directly by RhlR/BHL. Taken together, these results indicate that P. aeruginosa employs a multilayered hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade involving RhlR/BHL and LasR/OdDHL, interlinked via RpoS, to integrate the regulation of virulence determinants and secondary metabolites with adaptation and survival in the stationary phase.
The small nucleotides pppGpp and ppGpp (or (p)ppGpp) are rapidly synthesized in response to nutritional stress. In Escherichia coli, the enzymes RelA and SpoT are triggered by different starvation signals to produce (p)ppGpp. In many Gram-positive bacteria this is carried out by RelA and two small homologs. (p)ppGpp, along with the transcription factor DksA, has profound effects on transcription initiation in E. coli. (p)ppGpp/DksA exert differential effects on promoters by playing upon their intrinsic kinetic parameters, and by facilitating the utilization of alternative sigma factors. (p)ppGpp also regulates replication and translation. These studies highlight (p)ppGpp as a key factor in bacterial physiology that responds rapidly to diverse stresses, by shutting down growth and priming cellular defensive and adaptive processes.
Bacteria often cope with environmental stress by inducing alternative sigma (sigma) factors, which direct RNA polymerase to specific promoters, thereby inducing a set of genes called a regulon to combat the stress. To understand the conserved and organism-specific functions of each sigma, it is necessary to be able to predict their promoters, so that their regulons can be followed across species. However, the variability of promoter sequences and motif spacing makes their prediction difficult. We developed and validated an accurate promoter prediction model for Escherichia coli sigmaE, which enabled us to predict a total of 89 unique sigmaE-controlled transcription units in E. coli K-12 and eight related genomes. SigmaE controls the envelope stress response in E. coli K-12. The portion of the regulon conserved across genomes is functionally coherent, ensuring the synthesis, assembly, and homeostasis of lipopolysaccharide and outer membrane porins, the key constituents of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The larger variable portion is predicted to perform pathogenesis-associated functions, suggesting that sigmaE provides organism-specific functions necessary for optimal host interaction. The success of our promoter prediction model for sigmaE suggests that it will be applicable for the prediction of promoter elements for many alternative sigma factors.
The yeast heat shock transcription factor gene, HSF1, has been isolated from an S. cerevisiae genomic expression library (in lambda gt11). The sequenced gene encodes an 833 amino acid protein having a mass of 93,218 daltons. Expression of specific DNA-binding activity in E. coli and of transcriptional activity in yeast confirmed the identity of the cloned gene. Southern analysis and gene-disruption experiments indicate that the heat shock transcription factor is encoded by a single-copy, essential gene. The DNA-binding domain was localized to a 118 amino acid region in the amino-terminal third of the protein. Inspection of the DNA-binding domain reveals no resemblance to any currently known secondary structural motifs implicated in DNA recognition and binding.
Upon exposure to oxygen, Escherichia coli increases the expression of enzymes essential for aerobic respiration, such as components of the TCA cycle and terminal oxidase complexes. This increase requires the elimination of repression mediated by the Arc regulatory system under anaerobic conditions. Coordinately, the synthesis of enzymes that function in anaerobic processes such as fermentation decreases, partly due to the inactivation of the transcription factor Fnr. E. coli is thus able to adjust the levels of respiratory enzymes to fit its environmental circumstances, and in this case, reduces the production of the less energy efficient fermentation enzymes in favor of the aerobic pathways. In contrast to the advantage in energy production, aerobiosis brings a disadvantage to E. coli: the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e.superoxide anion radical (O2·- hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (·OH). These byproducts of aerobic respiration damage many biological molecules, including DNA, proteins, and lipids. To alleviate the toxicity of these compounds, E. coli induces the synthesis of protective enzymes, such as Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (SodA) and catalase I (HP I), and this induction is controlled by the regulatory proteins SoxRS, OxyR, and ArcAB. Thus, ArcAB, Fnr, SoxRS, and OxyR function in concert so that E. coli can optimize its energy production and growth rate. Fnr and SoxRS are cytoplasmic, DNA-binding proteins, and these regulatory systems utilize iron-sulfur clusters as cofactors which may directly sense the redox environment. OxyR is also a cytoplasmic, DNA-binding protein, and appears to respond to redox potential through the oxidation state of a specific cysteine residue. In the ArcAB system (which belongs to the family of two-component regulatory systems), ArcB, a membrane protein, functions as the sensor, and ArcA, a DNA-binding protein, directly controls target gene expression. Under anaerobic conditions, ArcB undergoes autophosphorylation and transphosphorylates ArcA, stimulating ArcA's DNA-binding activity. During aerobic growth, the transphosphorylation of ArcA does not occur. In this signal transduction mechanism, the ArcB C-terminal or “receiver” domain plays a critical role; that is, it stimulates or abolishes the transphosphorylation depending on the metabolic state of the cell, which in turn is influenced by the availability of oxygen. E. coli thus employs at least four global regulatory systems which monitor the cellular oxidative/metabolic conditions, and adjust the expression of more than 70 operons to give the organism a better aerobic life.
Machine learning approaches offer the potential to systematically identify transcriptional regulatory interactions from a compendium of microarray expression profiles. However, experimental validation of the performance of these methods at the genome scale has remained elusive. Here we assess the global performance of four existing classes of inference algorithms using 445 Escherichia coli Affymetrix arrays and 3,216 known E. coli regulatory interactions from RegulonDB. We also developed and applied the context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) algorithm, a novel extension of the relevance networks class of algorithms. CLR demonstrates an average precision gain of 36% relative to the next-best performing algorithm. At a 60% true positive rate, CLR identifies 1,079 regulatory interactions, of which 338 were in the previously known network and 741 were novel predictions. We tested the predicted interactions for three transcription factors with chromatin immunoprecipitation, confirming 21 novel interactions and verifying our RegulonDB-based performance estimates. CLR also identified a regulatory link providing central metabolic control of iron transport, which we confirmed with real-time quantitative PCR. The compendium of expression data compiled in this study, coupled with RegulonDB, provides a valuable model system for further improvement of network inference algorithms using experimental data.
In nucleotide excision repair DNA damage is removed through incision of the damaged strand on both sides of the lesion, followed by repair synthesis, which fills the gap using the intact strand as a template, and finally ligation. In prokaryotes the damaged base is removed in a 12-13 nucleotide (nt)-long oligomer; in eukaryotes including humans the damage is excised in a 24-32 nt-long fragment. Excision in Escherichia coli is accomplished by three proteins designated UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC. In humans, by contrast, 16 polypeptides including seven xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) proteins, the trimric replication protein A [RPA, human single-stranded DNA binding protein (HSSB)], and the multisubunit (7-10) general transcription factor TFIIH are required for the dual incisions. Transcribed strands are specifically targeted for excision repair by a transcription-repair coupling factor both in E. coli and in humans. In humans, excision repair is an important defense mechanism against the two major carcinogens, sunlight and cigarette smoke. Individuals defective in excision repair exhibit a high incidence of cancer while individuals with a defect in coupling transcription to repair suffer from neurological and skeletal abnormalities.
Transcription factor Sp1 is a protein present in mammalian cells that binds to GC box promoter elements and selectively activates mRNA synthesis from genes that contain functional recognition sites. We have isolated a cDNA that encodes the 696 C-terminal amino acid residues of human Sp1. By expression of truncated fragments of Sp1 in E. coli, we have localized the DNA binding activity to the C-terminal 168 amino acid residues. In this region, Sp1 has three contiguous Zn(II) finger motifs, which are believed to be metalloprotein structures that interact with DNA. We have found that purified Sp1 requires Zn(II) for sequence-specific binding to DNA. Thus, it is likely that Sp1 interacts with DNA by binding of the Zn(II) fingers. To facilitate the identification of mutant variants of Sp1 that are defective in DNA binding, we have also devised a bacterial colony assay for detection of Sp1 binding to DNA.
We have used an S1 mapping assay to demonstrate that the mRNA transcripts of the Escherichia coli galactose operon found in intact E. coli cells with a defect in adenylate cyclase or the cyclic AMP receptor protein contain at their 5' end about five nucleotides more than the gal mRNA molecules made in wild type cells. The same difference between gal RNA synthesized in vitro in the absence of cyclic AMP or cyclic AMP receptor protein and gal RNA made in the presence of these factors is detected by this assay. Our results strongly suggest that the same two overlapping promoters, which we previously identified by in vitro transcription of gal DNA fragments, also control the expression of the galactose operon in intact cells. The intracellular levels of cyclic AMP determine which promoter is utilized.
An improved method is described for the renaturation of microgram amounts of proteins from sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. The protein band is visualized in the gel by KCl staining, the band cut out and crushed, and the protein eluted by diffusion in a buffer containing 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate. Protein is concentrated and sodium dodecyl sulfate is removed by acetone precipitation of the sample. Renaturation of the protein occurs after the precipitate is dissolved in 6 m guanidine hydrochloride and then diluted. The activity of the sigma subunit of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase can be recovered with 98–100% efficiency after electrophoresis in an SDS-gel and renaturation by this technique. To assess whether the method is generally applicable we tested some or all of the steps involved in the procedure using E. coli transcription termination factor rho, β-galactosidase, alkaline phosphatase, wheat α-amylase, and DNA topoisomerase. We show how the method can be used to determine the approximate molecular weight of the DNA topoisomerase polypeptide by sectioning a gel on which a partially pure sample has been fractionated by electrophoresis.
Much of the information available about factors that affect mRNA decay in Escherichia coli, and by inference in other bacteria, has been gleaned from study of less than 25 of the approximately 4,300 predicted E. coli messages. To investigate these factors more broadly, we examined the half-lives and steady-state abundance of known and predicted E. coli mRNAs at single-gene resolution by using two-color fluorescent DNA microarrays. An rRNA-based strategy for normalization of microarray data was developed to permit quantitation of mRNA decay after transcriptional arrest by rifampicin. We found that globally, mRNA half-lives were similar in nutrient-rich media and defined media in which the generation time was approximately tripled. A wide range of stabilities was observed for individual mRNAs of E. coli, although approximately 80% of all mRNAs had half-lives between 3 and 8 min. Genes having biologically related metabolic functions were commonly observed to have similar stabilities. Whereas the half-lives of a limited number of mRNAs correlated positively with their abundance, we found that overall, increased mRNA stability is not predictive of increased abundance. Neither the density of putative sites of cleavage by RNase E, which is believed to initiate mRNA decay in E. coli, nor the free energy of folding of 5' or 3' untranslated region sequences was predictive of mRNA half-life. Our results identify previously unsuspected features of mRNA decay at a global level and also indicate that generalizations about decay derived from the study of individual gene transcripts may have limited applicability.
The PurR transcription factor plays a critical role in transcriptional regulation of purine metabolism in enterobacteria. Here, we elucidate the role of PurR under exogenous adenine stimulation at the genome-scale using high-resolution chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)–chip and gene expression data obtained under in vivo conditions. Analysis of microarray data revealed that adenine stimulation led to changes in transcript level of about 10% of Escherichia coli genes, including the purine biosynthesis pathway. The E. coli strain lacking the purR gene showed that a total of 56 genes are affected by the deletion. From the ChIP–chip analysis, we determined that over 73% of genes directly regulated by PurR were enriched in the biosynthesis, utilization and transport of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides, and 20% of them were functionally unknown. Compared to the functional diversity of the regulon of the other general transcription factors in E. coli, the functions and size of the PurR regulon are limited.
▪ Abstract Proteolysis in Escherichia coli serves to rid the cell of abnormal and misfolded proteins and to limit the time and amounts of availability of critical regulatory proteins. Most intracellular proteolysis is initiated by energy-dependent proteases, including Lon, ClpXP, and HflB; HflB is the only essential E. coli protease. The ATPase domains of these proteases mediate substrate recognition. Recognition elements in target are not well defined, but are probably not specific amino acid sequences. Naturally unstable protein substrates include the regulatory sigma factors for heat shock and stationary phase gene expression, σ32 and RpoS. Other cellular proteins serve as environmental sensors that modulate the availability of the unstable proteins to the proteases, resulting in rapid changes in sigma factor levels and therefore in gene transcription. Many of the specific proteases found in E. coli are well-conserved in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and serve critical functions in developmental systems.
We track the motion of individual fluorescently labeled mRNA molecules inside live E. coli cells. We find that the motion is subdiffusive, with an exponent that is robust to physiological changes, including the disruption of cytoskeletal elements. By modifying the parameters of the RNA molecule and the bacterial cell, we are able to examine the possible mechanisms that can lead to this unique type of motion, especially the effect of macromolecular crowding. We also examine the implications of anomalous diffusion on the kinetics of bacterial gene regulation, in particular, how transcription factors find their DNA targets.
Quantitative views of cellular functions require precise measures of rates of biomolecule production, especially proteins-the direct effectors of biological processes. Here, we present a genome-wide approach, based on ribosome profiling, for measuring absolute protein synthesis rates. The resultant E. coli data set transforms our understanding of the extent to which protein synthesis is precisely controlled to optimize function and efficiency. Members of multiprotein complexes are made in precise proportion to their stoichiometry, whereas components of functional modules are produced differentially according to their hierarchical role. Estimates of absolute protein abundance also reveal principles for optimizing design. These include how the level of different types of transcription factors is optimized for rapid response and how a metabolic pathway (methionine biosynthesis) balances production cost with activity requirements. Our studies reveal how general principles, important both for understanding natural systems and for synthesizing new ones, emerge from quantitative analyses of protein synthesis.
▪ Abstract The promoter recognition specificity of Escherichia coli RNA polymerase is modulated by replacement of the σ subunit in the first step and by interaction with transcription factors in the second step. The overall differentiated state of ∼2000 molecules of the RNA polymerase in a single cell can be estimated after measurement of both the intracellular concentrations and the RNA polymerase-binding affinities for all seven species of the σ subunit and 100–150 transcription factors. The anticipated impact from this line of systematic approach is that the prediction of the expression hierarchy of ∼4000 genes on the E. coli genome can be estimated.
ABSTRACT The genome DNA of Escherichia coli is associated with about 10 DNA-binding structural proteins, altogether forming the nucleoid. The nucleoid proteins play some functional roles, besides their structural roles, in the global regulation of such essential DNA functions as replication, recombination, and transcription. Using a quantitative Western blot method, we have performed for the first time a systematic determination of the intracellular concentrations of 12 species of the nucleoid protein in E. coli W3110, including CbpA (curved DNA-binding protein A), CbpB (curved DNA-binding protein B, also known as Rob [right origin binding protein]), DnaA (DNA-binding protein A), Dps (DNA-binding protein from starved cells), Fis (factor for inversion stimulation), Hfq (host factor for phage Q β ), H-NS (histone-like nucleoid structuring protein), HU (heat-unstable nucleoid protein), IciA (inhibitor of chromosome initiation A), IHF (integration host factor), Lrp (leucine-responsive regulatory protein), and StpA (suppressor of td mutant phenotype A). Intracellular protein levels reach a maximum at the growing phase for nine proteins, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Fis, Hfq, H-NS, HU, IciA, Lrp, and StpA, which may play regulatory roles in DNA replication and/or transcription of the growth-related genes. In descending order, the level of accumulation, calculated in monomers, in growing E. coli cells is Fis, Hfq, HU, StpA, H-NS, IHF*, CbpB (Rob), Dps*, Lrp, DnaA, IciA, and CbpA* (stars represent the stationary-phase proteins). The order of abundance, in descending order, in the early stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, HU, Hfq, H-NS, StpA, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, CbpA, and Fis, while that in the late stationary phase is Dps*, IHF*, Hfq, HU, CbpA*, StpA, H-NS, CbpB (Rob), DnaA, Lrp, IciA, and Fis. Thus, the major protein components of the nucleoid change from Fis and HU in the growing phase to Dps in the stationary phase. The curved DNA-binding protein, CbpA, appears only in the late stationary phase. These changes in the composition of nucleoid-associated proteins in the stationary phase are accompanied by compaction of the genome DNA and silencing of the genome functions.
The htpR gene of E. coli encodes a positive regulator of the heat-shock response. We have fused the htpR gene to the inducible PL promoter of phage lambda. Overproduction of HtpR following a temperature upshift resulted in the overexpression of heat-shock proteins. We describe the purification and initial in vitro characterization of the factor controlling expression of heat-shock genes. The factor was the 32 kd htpR gene product. In vitro, a mixture of HtpR and core RNA polymerase initiated transcription at heat-shock promoters. The sigma factor encoded by rpoD was not required for this reaction. Therefore, HtpR is a sigma factor that promotes transcription initiation at heat-shock promoters. We propose that htpR be renamed rpoH and that the gene product be called sigma-32.
ABSTRACT The genome-wide location of RNA polymerase binding sites was determined in Escherichia coli using chromatin immunoprecipitation and microarrays (chIP-chip). Cross-linked chromatin was isolated in triplicate from rifampin-treated cells, and DNA bound to RNA polymerase was precipitated with an antibody specific for the β′ subunit. The DNA was amplified and hybridized to “tiled” oligonucleotide microarrays representing the whole genome at 25-bp resolution. A total of 1,139 binding sites were detected and evaluated by comparison to gene expression data from identical conditions and to 961 promoters previously identified by established methods. Of the detected binding sites, 418 were located within 1,000 bp of a known promoter, leaving 721 previously unknown RNA polymerase binding sites. Within 200 bp, we were able to detect 51% (189/368) of the known σ70-specific promoters occurring upstream of an expressed open reading frame and 74% (273/368) within 1,000 bp. Conversely, many known promoters were not detected by chIP-chip, leading to an estimated 26% negative-detection rate. Most of the detected binding sites could be associated with expressed transcription units, but 299 binding sites occurred near inactive transcription units. This map of RNA polymerase binding sites represents a foundation for studies of transcription factors in E. coli and an important evaluation of the chIP-chip technique.
Abstract Metabolism controls gene expression through allosteric interactions between metabolites and transcription factors. These interactions are usually measured with in vitro assays, but there are no methods to identify them at a genome-scale in vivo. Here we show that dynamic transcriptome and metabolome data identify metabolites that control transcription factors in E. coli . By switching an E. coli culture between starvation and growth, we induce strong metabolite concentration changes and gene expression changes. Using Network Component Analysis we calculate the activities of 209 transcriptional regulators and correlate them with metabolites. This approach captures, for instance, the in vivo kinetics of CRP regulation by cyclic-AMP. By testing correlations between all pairs of transcription factors and metabolites, we predict putative effectors of 71 transcription factors, and validate five interactions in vitro. These results show that combining transcriptomics and metabolomics generates hypotheses about metabolism-transcription interactions that drive transitions between physiological states.
Quorum sensing is a cell-to-cell signalling mechanism in which bacteria secrete hormone-like compounds called autoinducers. When these auto-inducers reach a certain threshold concentration, they interact with bacterial transcriptional regulators, thereby regulating gene expression. Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) O157:H7 as well as E. coli K-12 produces the autoinducer-2 (AI-2), which is synthesized by the product of the luxS gene, and previous work from our laboratory has shown that genes encoding the EHEC type III secretion system were activated by quorum sensing. Recently, by hybridizing an E. coli K-12 gene array with cDNA synthesized from RNA extracted from EHEC strain 86-24 and its isogenic luxS mutant, we observed that other potential virulence-associated factors, such as genes encoding the expression and assembly of flagella, motility and chemotaxis, were also activated by quorum sensing. The array data also indicated that several genes encoding putative E. coli regulators were controlled by quorum sensing. In this report, we describe a two-component system regulated by quorum sensing that shares homology with Salmonella typhimurium PmrAB, which we have named quorum sensing E. coli regulator B and C (QseBC). The qseBC genes, previously identified only as open reading frames b3025 and b3026, are organized in an operon in the E. coli chromosome, with qseB encoding the response regulator and qseC the sensor kinase. We confirmed the regulation of qseBC by quorum sensing using qseB::lacZ transcriptional fusions and characterized the phenotypes of an isogenic qseC mutation in EHEC. This mutant expressed less flagellin and had reduced motility compared with the wild-type and complemented strains. Transcription of flhD, fliA, motA and fliC::lacZ fusions was decreased in the qseC mutant, suggesting that qseBC is a transcriptional regulator of flagella genes. A qseC mutant was also generated in E. coli K-12 strain MC1000 that showed the same phenotypes as the EHEC mutant, indicating that qseBC regulates flagella and motility by quorum sensing in both EHEC and K-12. QseBC activates transcription of flhDC, which is the master regulator for the flagella and motility genes and, in the absence of flhD, QseBC failed to activate the transcription of fliA. Motility of a luxS, but not of a qseC, mutant can be restored by providing AI-2 exogenously as preconditioned media, suggesting that the qseC mutant is unable to respond to AI-2. However, QseC has no effect on the expression of other quorum sensing-controlled genes such as those encoding for the type III secretion system. These data indicate that QseBC is one component of the quorum-sensing regulatory cascade in both EHEC and K-12 that is involved in the regulation of flagella and motility genes, but that additional regulators in this cascade remain to be characterized.
sigma E, an RNA polymerase sigma factor of apparent M(r) 28,000, was previously identified by its ability to direct transcription from the P2 promoter of the agarose gene (dagA) of Streptomyces coelicolor. A degenerate oligonucleotide probe, designed from the N-terminal sequence of purified sigma E, was used to isolate the sigma E gene (sigE). The predicted sequence of sigma E shows greatest similarity to sequences of seven other proteins: Myxococcus xanthus CarQ, Pseudomonas aeruginosa AlgU, Pseudomonas syringae HrpL, Escherichia coli sigma E, Alcaligenes eutrophus CnrH, E. coli FecI, and Bacillus subtilis SigX, a protein of unknown function. These eight proteins define a subfamily of eubacterial RNA polymerase factors sufficiently different from other sigma s that, in many cases, they are not identified by standard similarity searching methods. Available information suggests that all of them regulate extracytoplasmic functions and that they function as effector molecules responding to extracytoplasmic stimuli. A. eutrophus CnrH appears to be a plasmid-encoded factor.
Cell-free protein synthesis is becoming a powerful technique to construct and to study complex informational processes in vitro. Engineering synthetic gene circuits in a test tube, however, is seriously limited by the transcription repertoire of modern cell-free systems, composed of only a few bacteriophage regulatory elements. Here, we report the construction and the phenomenological characterization of synthetic gene circuits engineered with a cell-free expression toolbox that works with the seven E. coli sigma factors. The E. coli endogenous holoenzyme E70 is used as the primary transcription machinery. Elementary circuit motifs, such as multiple stage cascades, AND gate and negative feedback loops are constructed with the six other sigma factors, two bacteriophage RNA polymerases, and a set of repressors. The circuit dynamics reveal the importance of the global mRNA turnover rate and of passive competition-induced transcriptional regulation. Cell-free reactions can be carried out over long periods of time with a small-scale dialysis reactor or in phospholipid vesicles, an artificial cell system. This toolbox is a unique platform to study complex transcription/translation-based biochemical systems in vitro.
It has long been known that cell-cell adhesiveness is generally reduced in human cancers. Tumor cells are dissociated throughout the entire tumor masses of diffuse-type cancers, whereas those of solid tumors with high metastatic potentials are often focally dissociated or dedifferentiated at the invading fronts. Thus, both irreversible and reversible mechanisms for inactivating the cell adhesion system appear to exist. This paper focuses on the cadherin system, which mediates Ca2+-dependent homophilic cell-cell adhesion. The E (epithelial)-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion system in cancer cells is inactivated by multiple mechanisms corresponding to the pathological features described above. Mutations have been found in the genes for E-cadherin and its undercoat proteins, alpha- and beta-catenins, which connect cadherins to actin filaments and establish firm cell-cell adhesion. Transcriptional inactivation of E-cadherin expression was shown to occur frequently in tumor progression. E-cadherin expression in human cancer cells is regulated by CpG methylation around the promoter region. The cadherin system interacts directly with products of oncogenes, eg, cerbB-2 protein and the epidermal growth factor receptor, and of the tumor suppressor gene, adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein, through beta-catenin, which may be important in signal transduction pathways contributing to the determination of the biological properties of human cancers. In conclusion, inactivation of the E-cadherin system by multiple mechanisms, including both genetic and epigenetic events, plays a significant role in multistage carcinogenesis.
Focus Review22 May 2012free access The many faces and functions of β-catenin Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Tomas Valenta Tomas Valenta Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author George Hausmann George Hausmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Konrad Basler Corresponding Author Konrad Basler Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland Search for more papers by this author Author Information Tomas Valenta1, George Hausmann1 and Konrad Basler 1 1Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland *Corresponding author. Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, Zurich 8057, Switzerland. Tel.:+41 44 635 3111; Fax:+41 44 635 6864; E-mail: [email protected] The EMBO Journal (2012)31:2714-2736https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2012.150 PDFDownload PDF of article text and main figures. ToolsAdd to favoritesDownload CitationsTrack CitationsPermissions ShareFacebookTwitterLinked InMendeleyWechatReddit Figures & Info β-Catenin (Armadillo in Drosophila) is a multitasking and evolutionary conserved molecule that in metazoans exerts a crucial role in a multitude of developmental and homeostatic processes. More specifically, β-catenin is an integral structural component of cadherin-based adherens junctions, and the key nuclear effector of canonical Wnt signalling in the nucleus. Imbalance in the structural and signalling properties of β-catenin often results in disease and deregulated growth connected to cancer and metastasis. Intense research into the life of β-catenin has revealed a complex picture. Here, we try to capture the state of the art: we try to summarize and make some sense of the processes that regulate β-catenin, as well as the plethora of β-catenin binding partners. One focus will be the interaction of β-catenin with different transcription factors and the potential implications of these interactions for direct cross-talk between β-catenin and non-Wnt signalling pathways. Introduction Wnt signalling represents one of a few key molecular cascades that regulate cell fate in animals throughout their lifespan. Already during embryonic development Wnt-regulated β-catenin critically contributes to the establishment of the body axis and the orchestration of tissue and organ development. In adult organs, Wnt signalling continues to play indispensable roles in tissue homeostasis, cell renewal, and regeneration. Interaction of Wnt ligands with their receptor complexes triggers several intracellular signalling cascades; these are, traditionally, separated into two types according to the role played by β-catenin. In the canonical Wnt cascade, β-catenin is the key effector responsible for transduction of the signal to the nucleus and it triggers transcription of Wnt-specific genes responsible for the control of cell fate decisions in many cells and tissues. The second type of Wnt signalling is independent of β-catenin signalling function and comprises, among others, the Wnt/PCP (Planar Cell Polarity) and Wnt-dependent/protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent pathways (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). We will focus here on β-catenin-dependent signalling and refer the interested reader to the following excellent reviews on the other types of Wnt signalling (van Amerongen et al, 2008; Angers and Moon, 2009). But β-catenin is not just a component of the Wnt signal cascade (Figure 1). In the late 1980s, β-catenin was independently discovered twice, on the basis of its different functions: structural and signalling. The group of Rolf Kemler isolated β-catenin, together with two other molecules (α-catenin and γ-catenin/plakoglobin), as proteins associated with E-cadherin, the key molecule of Ca2+-dependent cell adhesion. These proteins were named catenins (in Latin catena means chain) to reflect their linking of E-cadherin to cytoskeletal structures (Ozawa et al, 1989). The signalling potential of β-catenin was exposed through its Drosophila orthologue Armadillo: the armadillo gene was discovered in the seminal screens for mutations affecting segmentation of the Drosophila embryo, performed by Eric Wieschaus, Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, and Gerd Jürgens (Wieschaus et al, 1984). Whereas the wild-type embryonic cuticle contains segments with alternating rows of denticles and naked belts, segments in armadillo mutants form only a lawn of denticles, the naked belts are missing. Such phenotypes resemble wingless null mutants (Wieschaus and Riggleman, 1987). Further analysis of Armadillo performed by the laboratories of Eric Wieschaus, Mark Peifer, and others revealed the conservation of its structural function in adherens junctions (McCrea et al, 1990; Peifer and Wieschaus, 1990; Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). Epistatic analysis determined that the armadillo segmentation function is regulated by Wingless (Riggleman et al, 1990). This finding was a key step in the subsequent characterization of the Wnt/β-catenin (or Wingless/Armadillo, respectively) signalling cascade, and of the functions and mutual interactions of its individual components. Another important part of this mosaic was revealed by the description of the basic pathway leading from the Wingless ligand through Dishevelled to regulation of Armadillo stability by Shaggy/Zeste-white-3 (GSK3 in vertebrates) (Siegfried et al, 1994). Finally in the mid-1990's several groups independently found that the signalling function of β-catenin/Armadillo in the nucleus is mediated via T-cell factor (TCF)/Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef) transcription factors, which in association with β-catenin trigger Wnt-mediated transcription (Behrens et al, 1996; Huber et al, 1996; Molenaar et al, 1996; Brunner et al, 1997; van de Wetering et al, 1997). The generation of conditional β-catenin mouse mutants (either knockout or constitutively active) has revealed that a vast array of developmental processes is regulated by the multitasking β-catenin in mammalian embryonic and adult tissues (reviewed in detail by Grigoryan et al, 2008). Figure 1.The life of β-catenin within the cell. Newly synthesized β-catenin is immobilized by E-cadherin at adherens junctions, where it can interact also with α-catenin, thereby indirectly modulating the actin cytoskeleton. β-catenin can be released from the adherens junctions by the activity of protein kinases or by downregulation of E-cadherin. Free excess β-catenin is immediately phosphorylated by the destruction complex and thus marked for subsequent degradation. A portion of β-catenin can be kept in the cytoplasm protected by APC. Wnt signalling blocks the activity of the destruction complex resulting in increased levels of cytolasmic β-catenin, which is translocated to the nucleus. In the nucleus, β-catenin associates with transcription factors from the TCF/Lef family and drives transcription of Wnt/β-catenin target genes. Other factors can also provide β-catenin with a DNA binding platform, often counteracting canonical Wnt signalling. Signalling activity of β-catenin in the nucleus can be regulated by modulating its nuclear import/export. Besides its structural role in the adherens junctions and signalling activity in the nucleus, β-catenin may also play an important function in the centrosome. CTTA, C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators, NTTA, N-Terminal Transcriptional Activators. Download figure Download PowerPoint The many roles of β-catenin beg the question as to how an evolutionarily conserved pathway can control so many varied processes during animal development and tissue homeostasis via one central molecule? Further, how is the final transcriptional output of β-catenin determined and modulated? Part of the explanation might be found in the plethora of β-catenin binding partners that either affect its transcriptional output or permit its direct cross-talk with other transcription factors and signalling pathways. In this review, we will discuss the following aspects: how is the β-catenin protein regulated, how might different transcriptional co-activators of β-catenin lead to diverse outcomes, how can β-catenin affect the activity of various transcription factors, and finally, what are the potential implications of a direct cross-talk between β-catenin and other signalling pathways? The structure of β-catenin determines its role as a scaffold molecule The Wnt/β-catenin pathway is one of a small set of conserved signalling cascades (together with Notch, Hedgehog, TGFβ/BMP, Hippo, and receptor tyrosine kinase-mediated pathways) that regulate animal development from Cnidarians to mammals. β-Catenin's orchestration of developmental processes is the sum of its dual roles—signalling and structural—as elegantly illustrated by the work of Lyashenko et al (2011): mouse Emryonic Stem Cells (mESC) lacking β-catenin lose their ability to differentiate into a mesodermal germ layer and do not form any neuroepithelium; both defects are connected to defective cell–cell junctions arising during the differentiation processes. Putting back a signalling-defective β-catenin restores the integrity of adherens junction and importantly also the ability of mESC to form neuroepithelial structures and endoderm. However the mesoderm formation is not rescued and thus requires also intact β-catenin transcription (Lyashenko et al, 2011). Similarly in the developing dorsal neural tube and the migrating population of neural crest cells the loss of β-catenin results in more drastic phenotypes than only blocking the β-catenin signalling outputs, further showing that the two roles of β-catenin cause an additive effect (Valenta et al, 2011). Such overlap and possible separation of β-catenin roles was also demonstrated in a seminal analysis in Drosophila more than a decade ago (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). How can the β-catenin protein mediate both distinct adhesive and signalling activities? The answer is in the structural composition of β-catenin. The β-catenin protein (781 aa residues in humans) consists of a central region (residues 141–664) made up of 12 imperfect Armadillo repeats (R1–12) that are flanked by distinct N- and C-terminal domains, NTD and CTD, respectively. A specific conserved helix (Helix-C) is located proximally to the CTD, adjacent to the last ARM repeat (residues 667–683) (Xing et al, 2008; Figure 2). The NTD and the CTD may be structurally flexible, whereas the central region forms a relatively rigid scaffold. This scaffold serves as an interaction platform for many β-catenin binding partners, at the membrane, in cytosol, and in the nucleus (Huber et al, 1997). Figure 2.β-Catenin serves as a binding platform for a multitude of interaction partners in adherens junctions, in the cytoplasm and in the nucleus. (A) The β-catenin protein consists of a central region composed of 12 Armadillo repeats (numbered boxes), flanked by an amino-terminal domain (NTD) and a carboxy-terminal domain (CTD). Between the last Armadillo repeat and the flexible part of the CTD is the conserved helix-C (C). Coloured bars show experimentally validated binding sites for β-catenin interaction partners. Colour code: purple, components of adherens junctions; blue, members of the β-catenin destruction complex; red, transcriptional co-activators; green, transcription factors providing DNA binding; gray, transcriptional inhibitors. C-Terminal Transcriptional Activators (CTTA), the critical domain for their binding is marked by brackets. Little circles indicate phosphorylation sites on either E-cadherin or APC that enhance the interactions. APC, Adenoma Polyposis Coli; TCF/Lef, T-cell factor/Lymphoid enhancer factor; AR, Androgen Receptor; LRH-1, Liver Receptor Homologue-1; ICAT, Inhibitor of β-catenin and TCF; BCL9, B-cell lymphoma-9. (B) The C-terminus of β-catenin serves as a binding factor for a multitude of complexes promoting β-catenin-mediated transcription. Experimentally validated binding motifs for particular proteins are indicated. In the grey boxes, the function is indicated of the particular β-catenin interactor or of a complex, where this binding partner is a member. Brg-1 is also known as SMARCA4, CBP as CREBBP. HAT, histone acetyl-transferase; HMT, histone methyl-transferase; MLL, mixed lineage leukaemia; PAF-1, Polymerase-associated factor-1; PIC, Pre-Initiation Complex; TBP, TATA-box Binding Protein; TRRAP, Transformation/transcription domain-associated protein. Download figure Download PowerPoint β-Catenin is a founding member of the Armadillo (ARM) repeat protein superfamily. Each ARM repeat of its central region comprises ∼42 residues, forming three helices arranged in triangular shape. Together, all ARM repeats form a superhelix that features a long, positively charged groove. Biochemical and crystal structure analyses revealed that many of β-catenin's binding partners share overlapping binding sites in the groove of the central β-catenin region: consequently, these partners cannot bind to β-catenin simultaneously. This mutual exclusivity is certainly valid for the key β-catenin interacting molecules: E-cadherin (the main partner in adherens junctions), APC (the main partner in the destruction complex), and TCF/Lef (the main partner in the nucleus). All these β-catenin interactors bind to the core binding site comprising ARM repeats R3–R9, where they form salt bridges with two key amino-acid residues, Lys312 and Lys435. Other ARM repeats are also involved, at least in strengthening the interaction (Graham et al, 2000; Eklof Spink et al, 2001; Huber and Weis, 2001; Poy et al, 2001). The spatial segregation of the different β-catenin binding partners within the cell may be important for enabling the function of these proteins. However, the competition among them for β-catenin is also important for regulating canonical Wnt signalling. Conformational changes of β-catenin may also help regulate its binding properties: the terminal regions of β-catenin (NTD and especially CTD) have been proposed to fold back on the central region affecting, for example, the binding of TCF/Lef (Castaño et al, 2002; Solanas et al, 2004). Biochemical evidence supports the model that β-catenin-mediated transcription is performed by a monomeric, back-folded form of β-catenin, whereas a cadherin-binding dimeric form is associated with α-catenin in adherens junctions (Gottardi and Gumbiner, 2004). Interestingly, Helix-C within the most N-terminal part of the CTD was shown to be essential for the signalling activity of β-catenin, while being completely dispensable for its role in cell–cell adhesion (Xing et al, 2008). This is not surprising, as a plethora of β-catenin transcriptional co-activators require an intact Helix-C (or region R12-Helix-C) for their proper binding (Figure 2; Mosimann et al, 2009). The crucial role of this part of β-catenin was predicted and experimentally demonstrated more than a decade ago by elegant in-vivo analyses of different mutants of Armadillo (Orsulic and Peifer, 1996). In these studies, mutants of Armadillo (point mutations or deletions) were produced, some interfered with the adhesion function, but not with its role in Wnt signalling, and vice versa: revealing that the two functions of Arm are separable. Some of these mutations specifically hit Helix-C and abrogated the signalling role but perfectly preserved the structural function of Armadillo. Recently, the ability to completely block the signalling output of Armadillo, without affecting its adhesive role, was confirmed and experimentally extended to β-catenin in mice (Valenta et al, 2011). Interestingly, the functional separation of the two roles occurred evolutionarily in Caenorhabdidis elegans. This nematode has at least three specialized β-catenins: the adhesion-specific HMP-2 that binds cadherins but not TCFs, and two signalling ones, BAR-1 and WRM-1, that can bind TCFs and regulate transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Yet another C. elegans protein, SYS-1, has adopted a signalling role, although it is not related to β-catenin on the sequence level. SYS-1 structurally mimics β-catenin (the positively charged groove), interacts with TCFs, and even mediates transcription (Liu et al, 2008). Such examples of functional separation, however, appear to be the exception. In the majority of animal species (including the model organisms Drosophila, Xenopus, and mouse), a single β-catenin carries out the two functions. These functions may be carried out by different protein pools and are orchestrated by mechanisms (e.g., post-translational modifications), which control the spatial separation, retention, or stability of β-catenin. That said, in vertebrates γ-catenin (plakoglobin), a close relative of β-catenin, may in certain cases compensate for the loss of β-catenin's structural function; in contrast, the signalling role of β-catenin in vivo seems not to be compensated (Huelsken et al, 2000; Grigoryan et al, 2008). The role of plakoglobin in Wnt/β-catenin signalling warrants further clarification. β-Catenin is an evolutionarily conserved protein The usually single β-catenin gene represents the highly conserved centre piece within the complex expanded Wnt signalling pathway (Figure 3). The Wnt pathway features a multitude of paralogous components, especially at the level of Wnt ligands and their receptors. The complexity at the level of the Wnt ligands and receptors (Frizzled proteins) seems to have arisen early in metazoan evolution. In Cnidarians, 14 Wnt genes have been identified which belong to 12 of the 13 known different Wnt subfamilies, 11 of which are also present in vertebrates, where some additional duplication events within individual subfamilies lead to expression of up to 19 different Wnts in mammals (Kusserow et al, 2005). In sponges (Porifera), which constitute some of the most basal metazoans, the Wnt ligand complexity is not as high, only three (respectively two) Wnt ligands are known (Lapébie et al, 2009; Adamska et al, 2010). Figure 3.β-Catenin is an evolutionarily ancient molecule that provided its function before Wnt signalling and classical cadherin-based adhesion appeared. Schematic evolutionary tree showing the relationships among Amoebozoa (represented by Dictyostelium discoideum) and metazoa, as well as the diversity of signalling components. In Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin acts as a functional molecule in polarized epithelia. In animals (metazoa), β-catenin plays a dual role as a signalling component of canonical Wnt signalling or as a structural component of cadherin-based cell–cell junctions. The presence of β-catenin and key components of adherens junctions (classical cadherins—containing an intracellular domain binding to β-catenin) and of canonical Wnt signalling (Wnt ligands, TCF/Lef transcription factors) is indicated to the right. In the case of Wnt ligands, the first number indicates how many different Wnt ligands were determined, the second number in brackets indicates how many Wnt subfamilies were determined in a particular group. The number in the case of TCF/Lef refers to how many different TCF/Lef proteins were found. Yes means presence, no absence. The following animal species were compared: Porifera (Sponges): Amphimedon queenslandica, Cnidaria: Nematostella vectans, Insects: Drosophila melanogaster; Vertebrates: Mus musculus. Download figure Download PowerPoint In sponges, ctenophores, and cnidarians, one gene encodes a β-catenin protein with striking sequence similarity to mammalian β-catenin. Cnidarian β-catenin (e.g., of the polyp Hydra) exhibits >60% of amino-acid identity with mammalian β-catenin, with the main differences being found in the most C-terminal part, which is generally less conserved (Xing et al, 2008; Zhao et al, 2011). The structural identity of the repeat domain of β-catenin is nearly 80%. Moreover, locus conservation among sponges (Amphimedon sp.), cnidarians (sea anemone Nematostella vectans) and later developed metazoans (Deuterostomia; vertebrates belong to this group) includes even the exon/intron features of the β-catenin gene (Holland et al, 2005; Adamska et al, 2010). Highlighting the pivotal role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling also in early metazoans are findings that changes in β-catenin levels dramatically impact their development. In sponges (Porifera), the activation of Wnt/β-catenin signalling by blocking β-catenin degradation leads to the formation of ectopic ostia (canal openings), which can disrupt feeding (Lapébie et al, 2009). In Hydra (Cnidaria), ectopic stabilization of β-catenin results in multiple head and tentacle formation along the body, while the opposite phenotype, a loss of head structures, results from depletion of β-catenin (Broun et al, 2005; Müller et al, 2007; Gee et al, 2010). Such observations suggest that Wnt/β-catenin signalling represents a primeval component, driving metazoan body plan and axis formation since the beginning of animal evolution. The critical role of Wnt/β-catenin signalling for establishing the primary body axis (Petersen and Reddien, 2009), or more precisely A/P (anterior/posterior) identity, has been long studied in diverse organisms. It is a re-occuring theme and reveals itself either in individual (para)segments, as in the Drosophila embryo, or of whole developing body plans, such as in vertebrates (Sanson, 2001; Niehrs, 2010). A paradigmatic example showing the indispensable role of β-catenin in the process of axial patterning came from experiments in the amphibian Xenopus laevis: ectopic expression of β-catenin in ventral blastomeres of Xenopus embryos induces axis duplication (i.e., the formation of a secondary axis), a phenotype reminiscent of misexpression of several Wnt ligands (Guger and Gumbiner, 1995). Depletion of β-catenin results in the opposite effect, ventralization of the embryo with a shortened A/P axis (Haesman et al, 1994). A/P axis identity and mesoderm formation is controlled by β-catenin-mediated transcription also in mammals, since mouse embryos lacking β-catenin do not develop a proper A/P axis and fail to form mesoderm, resulting in corrupted gastrulation (Haegel et al, 1995; Huelsken et al, 2000). Interestingly, a homologue of β-catenin was found also in the non-metazoan social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum (slime mould) (Coates et al, 2002). This contrasts with the lack of Wnt ligands, and indeed of most proteins involved in Wnt signalling, which so far have been identified solely in metazoans but not in any other phyla (Figure 3). In normal circumstances, Dictyostelium discoideum is a unicellular organism; but in response to starvation single cells start to aggregate and form fruiting bodies, which comprise a rigid stalk and on its tip a collection of spores. During the formation of a fruiting body the aggregated cells establish a polarized epithelium that is essential for the subsequent multicellular phase of development. Even though Dictyostelium discoideum, in contrast to metazoans, lacks classical cadherins, the β-catenin orthologue Aardvark is an essential structural molecule in the polarized epithelia. Moreover, to maintain the proper epithelial structure Aardvark cooperates with α-catenin, another key structural molecule known from metazoans. Ddα-catenin is upregulated during the transition to multicellularity and colocalizes with Aardvark and F-actin at the sites of cell–cell contact. Loss or knockdown of either Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin or Ddα-catenin significantly compromises epithelial morphology, polarity, and formation of fruiting bodies (Dickinson et al, 2011). Thus, β-catenin, together with α-catenin and most likely actin, can promote primitive cell–cell contacts even without cadherins. These observations suggest that the principles underlying metazoan multicellularity may be more ancient than previously thought and that the structural role of β-catenin precedes its signalling role in the canonical Wnt pathway—β-catenin and α-catenin were engaged in the formation of polarized epithelia before classical catenins came on the scene in metazoans. However, even in Dictyostelium discoideum, β-catenin is not exclusively a structural molecule. In response to cAMP, a series of events leads to phosphorylation of GSK3, an orthologue of GSKA that phosphorylates Aardvark/Ddβ-catenin. This phosphorylation event activates Aardvark and leads to gene transcription via a so far unknown mechanism, as there are no TCF/Lef transcription factors in Dictyostelium discoideum (Grimson et al, 2000). Even though the mechanism seems different from the core Wnt/β-catenin pathway (phosphorylation leads to activation, not to degradation), at least the interaction between β-catenin and GSK3 is present and may have further evolved into the mode of action typical for canonical Wnt signalling. Canonical signalling in a nutshell Without a Wnt signal, the levels of cytoplasmic free β-catenin are kept low (Figure 1). If not bound to E-cadherin, β-catenin is phosphorylated in the cytoplasm by the activity of a multiprotein destruction complex, marking β-catenin for degradation. This complex consists of the scaffold proteins Axin and Adenoma Polyposis Coli (APC), and of the kinases phosphorylating β-catenin, glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β), casein kinase 1 (CK1) and protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) (Kimelman and Xu, 2006). The binding of Wnt ligands to the Frizzled transmembrane receptors and LRP5/6 co-receptors (Low density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein) starts a series of molecular events leading to inhibition of the β-catenin destruction complex. Ligand activated Frizzled receptors recruit the cytoplasmic protein Dishevelled (Dvl) to the receptor complex through direct binding; Dvl subsequently multimerizes and induces formation of so-called LRP-associated Wnt signalosomes (Bilic et al, 2007). Dvl in turn recruits the rate-limiting component Axin (most likely together with associated kinases, such as GSK3) and thus destabilizes the β-catenin destruction complex (Schwarz-Romond et al, 2007). Dvl-mediated phosporylation of LRP5/6 by CK1 is key for proper functioning of the Wnt signalosome as it leads to a block of GSK3 kinase activity (Zeng et al, 2008). Unphosphorylated β-catenin escapes degradation, accumulates in the cytoplasm, and translocates to the nucleus. Nuclear β-catenin associates with DNA-binding transcription factors of the TCF/Lef family. TCF/Lef proteins possess only limited ability to activate transcription. In the absence of Wnt signals, TCF/Lef factors act as transcriptional repressors. The binding of β-catenin converts TCF/Lef proteins into bipartite TCF/β-catenin transcriptional activators, converting the Wnt signal into the transcription of specific target genes (Najdi et al, 2011; Archbold et al, 2012). Albeit elegant, recent work has made clear that such a simplified, linear scheme describing the translation of the Wnt signal via β-catenin into a cell-specific genetic program does not capture the full complexity of β-catenin-mediated functions within Wnt receiving cells. β-Catenin at the membrane: balancing adhesion and signalling The majority of β-catenin is located at the cytoplasmic side of the membrane as a component of cadherin-based cell–cell connections in the absence of a Wnt stimulus. Cadherin-based adherens junctions contribute to forming polarized epithelial tissues, a characteristic metazoan feature necessary for maintaining organismal integrity (Meng and Takeichi, 2009). Cadherins are single-pass transmembrane glycoproteins that engage in Ca2+-dependent homotypic interactions via their extracellular regions and that also link to β-catenin through their cytoplasmic tails. Classical cadherins were named for the tissue in which they were most prominently expressed: for example, epithelial cadherin (E-cadherin) in epithelial cells; neural cadherin (N-cadherin) in the nervous system. Many cell types co-express several cadherins (Meng and Takeichi, 2009; Stepniak et al, 2009). β-Catenin can interact with the cytoplasmic domain of all of them, but most studied are the functional consequences of the β-catenin–E-cadherin interaction. The cadherin–β-catenin interaction is constitutive and may occur even in single isolated cells in an adhesion-independent way (Stepniak et al, 2009). Newly synthesized E-cadherin associates with β-catenin while still in the endoplasmic reticulum and the two proteins move together to the cell membrane. Interfering with the binding of β-catenin to E-cadherin results in proteasomal degradation of the cadherin, because β-catenin shields a PEST sequence motif on E-cadherin, which, if free, is recognized by a ubiquitin ligase that marks E-cadherin for degradation (Hinc et al, 1994). Reciprocally, E-cadherin association stabilizes β-catenin by preventing binding of components of the β-catenin destruction complex (namely APC and Axin) (Huber and Weis, 2001). At cadherin-based cell–cell junctions, β-catenin can bind α-catenin with distal parts of the NTD and the adjacent first ARM repeat of β-catenin close to a hinge region around Arg151 (Figure 2; Pokutta and Weis 2000; Xing et al, 2008). In close proximity, C-terminal to this hinge, is the binding site for BCL9, an important transcriptional co-activator of β-catenin (Hoffm
In Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the production of many virulence factors and secondary metabolites is regulated in concert with cell density through quorum sensing. Two quorum-sensing regulons have been identified in which the LuxR homologues LasR and RhlR are activated by N-(3-oxododecanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone (OdDHL) and N-butanoyl-L-homoserine lactone (BHL) respectively. The lasR and rhlR genes are linked to the luxl homologues lasl and rhll, which are responsible for synthesis of OdDHL and BHL, respectively. As lasRl and rhlRl are both involved in regulating synthesis of exoenzymes such as elastase, we sought to determine the nature of their interrelationship. By using lacZ transcriptional fusions in both homologous (P. aeruginosa) and heterologous (Escherichia coli) genetic backgrounds we provide evidence that (i) lasR is expressed constitutively throughout the growth cycle, (ii) rhlR expression is regulated by LasR/OdDHL, and (iii) that RhlR/BHL regulates rhll. We also show that expression of the stationary-phase sigma factor gene rpoS is abolished in a P. aeruginosa lasR mutant and in the pleiotropic BHL-negative mutant PANO67. Furthermore, our data reveal that kin E. coli, an rpoS-lacZ fusion is regulated directly by RhlR/BHL. Taken together, these results indicate that P. aeruginosa employs a multilayered hierarchical quorum-sensing cascade involving RhlR/BHL and LasR/OdDHL, interlinked via RpoS, to integrate the regulation of virulence determinants and secondary metabolites with adaptation and survival in the stationary phase.
The small nucleotides pppGpp and ppGpp (or (p)ppGpp) are rapidly synthesized in response to nutritional stress. In Escherichia coli, the enzymes RelA and SpoT are triggered by different starvation signals to produce (p)ppGpp. In many Gram-positive bacteria this is carried out by RelA and two small homologs. (p)ppGpp, along with the transcription factor DksA, has profound effects on transcription initiation in E. coli. (p)ppGpp/DksA exert differential effects on promoters by playing upon their intrinsic kinetic parameters, and by facilitating the utilization of alternative sigma factors. (p)ppGpp also regulates replication and translation. These studies highlight (p)ppGpp as a key factor in bacterial physiology that responds rapidly to diverse stresses, by shutting down growth and priming cellular defensive and adaptive processes.
Bacteria often cope with environmental stress by inducing alternative sigma (sigma) factors, which direct RNA polymerase to specific promoters, thereby inducing a set of genes called a regulon to combat the stress. To understand the conserved and organism-specific functions of each sigma, it is necessary to be able to predict their promoters, so that their regulons can be followed across species. However, the variability of promoter sequences and motif spacing makes their prediction difficult. We developed and validated an accurate promoter prediction model for Escherichia coli sigmaE, which enabled us to predict a total of 89 unique sigmaE-controlled transcription units in E. coli K-12 and eight related genomes. SigmaE controls the envelope stress response in E. coli K-12. The portion of the regulon conserved across genomes is functionally coherent, ensuring the synthesis, assembly, and homeostasis of lipopolysaccharide and outer membrane porins, the key constituents of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. The larger variable portion is predicted to perform pathogenesis-associated functions, suggesting that sigmaE provides organism-specific functions necessary for optimal host interaction. The success of our promoter prediction model for sigmaE suggests that it will be applicable for the prediction of promoter elements for many alternative sigma factors.
The yeast heat shock transcription factor gene, HSF1, has been isolated from an S. cerevisiae genomic expression library (in lambda gt11). The sequenced gene encodes an 833 amino acid protein having a mass of 93,218 daltons. Expression of specific DNA-binding activity in E. coli and of transcriptional activity in yeast confirmed the identity of the cloned gene. Southern analysis and gene-disruption experiments indicate that the heat shock transcription factor is encoded by a single-copy, essential gene. The DNA-binding domain was localized to a 118 amino acid region in the amino-terminal third of the protein. Inspection of the DNA-binding domain reveals no resemblance to any currently known secondary structural motifs implicated in DNA recognition and binding.
Upon exposure to oxygen, Escherichia coli increases the expression of enzymes essential for aerobic respiration, such as components of the TCA cycle and terminal oxidase complexes. This increase requires the elimination of repression mediated by the Arc regulatory system under anaerobic conditions. Coordinately, the synthesis of enzymes that function in anaerobic processes such as fermentation decreases, partly due to the inactivation of the transcription factor Fnr. E. coli is thus able to adjust the levels of respiratory enzymes to fit its environmental circumstances, and in this case, reduces the production of the less energy efficient fermentation enzymes in favor of the aerobic pathways. In contrast to the advantage in energy production, aerobiosis brings a disadvantage to E. coli: the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), i.e.superoxide anion radical (O2·- hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radical (·OH). These byproducts of aerobic respiration damage many biological molecules, including DNA, proteins, and lipids. To alleviate the toxicity of these compounds, E. coli induces the synthesis of protective enzymes, such as Mn-dependent superoxide dismutase (SodA) and catalase I (HP I), and this induction is controlled by the regulatory proteins SoxRS, OxyR, and ArcAB. Thus, ArcAB, Fnr, SoxRS, and OxyR function in concert so that E. coli can optimize its energy production and growth rate. Fnr and SoxRS are cytoplasmic, DNA-binding proteins, and these regulatory systems utilize iron-sulfur clusters as cofactors which may directly sense the redox environment. OxyR is also a cytoplasmic, DNA-binding protein, and appears to respond to redox potential through the oxidation state of a specific cysteine residue. In the ArcAB system (which belongs to the family of two-component regulatory systems), ArcB, a membrane protein, functions as the sensor, and ArcA, a DNA-binding protein, directly controls target gene expression. Under anaerobic conditions, ArcB undergoes autophosphorylation and transphosphorylates ArcA, stimulating ArcA's DNA-binding activity. During aerobic growth, the transphosphorylation of ArcA does not occur. In this signal transduction mechanism, the ArcB C-terminal or “receiver” domain plays a critical role; that is, it stimulates or abolishes the transphosphorylation depending on the metabolic state of the cell, which in turn is influenced by the availability of oxygen. E. coli thus employs at least four global regulatory systems which monitor the cellular oxidative/metabolic conditions, and adjust the expression of more than 70 operons to give the organism a better aerobic life.
